What Is an Adolescent Medicine Specialist?
Zits. Periods. Pressure to do drugs, drink, or smoke. Too much growth in places you don't expect — and not so much in places you do. There's a lot going on health-wise during the teen years. It helps to have a medical team who understands.

Adolescent medicine specialists have extra training in the medical and emotional issues that many teens face. They're taught to deal with topics like reproductive health, drugs, eating disorders, irregular periods, mood changes, questions about sexual identity, and problems at home or school.

Adolescent medicine specialists are doctors or other medical professionals (like nurse practitioners) who work alongside doctors to provide care.

Seeing an adolescent medicine specialist is a great way to move from childhood — where your parents controlled your health care — to adulthood, where you manage your own health and well-being.

Many adolescent medicine doctors provide gynecology care as well, including pelvic exams when needed. So instead of going to two different doctors, young women who need to see a pediatrician and a gynecologist often can see one adolescent medicine specialist.

How Can I Find One — and What If I Can't?
Start by asking your pediatrician — or your school nurse or health teacher — to recommend an adolescent medicine specialist. It's probably easier to find one if you live near a large town. But if you can't find one in your area, pediatricians, family practitioners, and internists know about teen health too (though at times they may send you to a specialist).

If you see a pediatrician or family doctor, ask for extra time to discuss what you need when you call to book your visit. Or ask to book the last appointment of the day. It can also help to prepare a list of questions and concerns and bring it with you.

No matter what type of doctor you decide to see, be open and honest about the things you worry about. The only way a doctor can help you is if they know what's going on. It may be hard to talk about topics like drugs or bumps "down there." But medical practitioners are used to it and they don't judge — it's all medicine to them.

A good doctor should put you at ease. If your doctor doesn't have enough time to listen to you or seems preachy, it's time to find someone who is better suited to your needs.

What's a Typical Visit Like?
If you see an adolescent medicine doctor, you'll probably spend more time talking than you have with doctors in the past. That's especially true if it's your first visit. You might discuss things that aren't even related to why you came to see the doctor in the first place.

Talking like this helps the doctor learn about your background so they can tailor health advice (and treatment) to your unique needs. Depending on why you're seeing the doctor, you may have a physical exam.

Adolescent medicine specialists usually try to spend some time with their patients alone. That allows the two of you to talk about confidential issues without other family members in the room. Some doctors will let you make and go to appointments by yourself, without an adult.

Some adolescent medicine doctors have schedules that allow them to spend as much time as needed with patients. But if you have lots of questions, it can't hurt to mention that when you book your visit.

It's just as important to have regular checkups now as when you were a kid to stay healthy and well, now and later in life. Adolescent medicine specialists understand that — and are there to help!

All About Periods
en español: Todo sobre la menstruación
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
A period is a release of blood from a girl's uterus, out through her vagina. It is a sign that she is getting close to the end of puberty. It also means that she can get pregnant if she has sex.

There is a lot to learn about periods. Here are answers to some common questions.

When Do Periods Usually Start?
Most girls get their first period when they're around 12. But sometimes it comes a few years earlier or later. Every girl's body has its own schedule.

There isn't one right age for a girl to get her period. But signs to watch for include:

breasts starting to develop (periods usually start about 2 years after this)
hair growing under a girl's arms and in her private parts
seeing or feeling vaginal discharge fluid (sort of like mucus), which usually begins about 6 months to a year before a girl gets her first period
What Causes a Period?
A period happens because of changes in hormones in the body. Hormones are chemical messengers. The ovaries release the female hormones estrogen and progesterone , which cause the lining of the uterus (or womb) to build up. The built-up lining is ready for a fertilized egg (an egg that has joined with a sperm) to attach to and develop into a baby. If there is no fertilized egg, the lining breaks down and bleeds. Then the same process happens all over again.



It usually takes about a month for the lining to build up, then break down. That is why most females get their periods around once a month.

How Does Ovulation Relate to Periods?
Ovulation (pronounced: ov-yoo-LAY-shun) is the release of an egg from the ovaries. The same hormones that cause the uterus lining to build up also cause an egg to leave one of the ovaries. The egg travels through a thin tube called a fallopian tube to the uterus.

If the egg is fertilized by a sperm cell, it attaches to the wall of the uterus, where over time it develops into a baby. If the egg is not fertilized, the uterus lining breaks down and bleeds, causing a period.

Do Periods Happen Regularly When Menstruation Starts?
For the first few years after a girl starts her period, it might not come regularly. This is normal at first. By about 2–3 years after her first period, a girl's periods should be coming around once every 4–5 weeks.

Can a Girl Get Pregnant as Soon as Her Period Starts?
Yes, a girl can get pregnant as soon as her period starts. A girl can even get pregnant right before her very first period because her hormones might already be active. The hormones may have led to ovulation and the building of the uterine wall. If so and the girl has sex, she can get pregnant, even though she has never had a period.

How Long Do Periods Last?
Periods usually last about 5 days. But a period can be shorter or last longer.

How Often Does a Period Happen?
Periods usually happen about once every 4–5 weeks. But some girls get their periods a little less or more often.

Should I Use a Pad, Tampon, or Menstrual Cup?
You have many choices about how to deal with period blood. You may need to experiment a bit to find which works best for you. Some girls use only one method and others switch between different methods.

Most girls use pads when they first get their period. Pads are made of cotton and come in lots of different sizes and shapes. They have sticky strips that attach to the underwear.
Many girls find tampons more convenient than pads, especially when playing sports or swimming. A tampon is a cotton plug that you put into your vagina. Most tampons come with an applicator that guides the tampon into place. The tampon absorbs the blood. Don't leave a tampon in for more than 8 hours because this can increase your risk of a serious infection called toxic shock syndrome.
Some girls prefer a menstrual cup. Most are made of silicone. To use a menstrual cup, a girl inserts it into her vagina. It holds the blood until she empties it.
How Much Blood Comes Out?
It may look like a lot of blood, but a girl usually only loses a few tablespoons of blood during the whole period. Most girls need to change their pad, tampon, or menstrual cup about 3‒6 times a day.

Will I Have Periods for the Rest of My Life?
When women reach menopause (around age 45‒55), their periods will permanently stop. Periods also stop during pregnancy.

What Is PMS?
PMS (premenstrual syndrome) is when emotional and physical symptoms happen before or during a girl's period. These can include moodiness, sadness, anxiety, bloating, and acne. The symptoms go away after the first few days of a period.

What Can I Do About Cramps?
Many girls have cramps with their period, especially in the first few days. If cramps bother you, you can try:

a warm heating pad on your belly
taking ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, or store brand) or naproxen (Aleve or store brand)
When Should I Call the Doctor?
Most girls don't have any problems with their periods. But call your doctor if you:

are 15 and haven't started your period
have had your period for more than 2 years and it's still not regular (coming about every 4–5 weeks)
have bleeding between periods
have severe cramps that don't get better with ibuprofen or naproxen 
have very heavy bleeding (bleeding that goes through a pad or tampon faster than every 1 hour)
have periods that last more than about a week
have severe PMS that gets in the way of your everyday activities
What Else Should I Know?
Periods are a natural, healthy part of life. They shouldn't get in the way of exercising, having fun, and enjoying life. If you have questions about periods, ask your doctor, a parent, health teacher, school nurse, or older sister.

Delayed Puberty
en español: Retraso de la pubertad
Medically reviewed by: Tal Grunwald, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Delayed Puberty?
Puberty is the time when your body grows from a child's to an adult's. You'll know that you are going through puberty by the way that your body changes.

Usually, these changes begin between the ages of 8 and 14 for girls, and between 9 and 15 for guys. This wide range in age is normal, and it's why you may develop several years earlier (or later) than most of your friends.

Sometimes, though, people pass this normal age range for puberty without showing any signs of body changes. This is called delayed puberty.

Doctors usually can help teens with delayed puberty develop so they can catch up with their peers.

What Are the Signs of Puberty?
If you're a girl, you'll notice that:

your breasts develop
your pubic hair grows
you have a growth spurt
you get your period (menstruation)
your body gets curvier with wider hips
If you're a guy, you'll notice that:

you start growing pubic and facial hair
you have a growth spurt
your testicles and penis get larger
your body shape changes — your shoulders will widen and your body will become more muscular
These changes are caused by the sex hormones — testosterone in guys and estrogen in girls — that your body is making in much larger amounts than before.

What Happens in Delayed Puberty?
Signs of delayed puberty in guys include:

the penis and testicles not starting to grow larger by age 14
genital growth that takes longer than 5 years
short stature compared with their peers, who now are growing faster
In girls, signs include:

no breast development by age 14
not starting to menstruate within 5 years of when breasts start to grow or by age 16
What Causes Delayed Puberty?
Puberty can be delayed for several reasons.

Family History
Most often, it's simply a pattern of growth and development in a family. A guy or girl may find that his or her parent, uncle, aunt, brothers, sisters, or cousins developed later than usual, too. This is called constitutional delay (or being a late bloomer), and it usually doesn't need treatment. These teens in time will develop normally, just later than most of their peers.

Medical Problems
Medical problems also can cause delays in puberty.

Some people with chronic illnesses like diabetes, cystic fibrosis, kidney disease, or even asthma may go through puberty at an older age. That's because their illnesses can make it harder for their bodies to grow and develop. Proper treatment and better control of these conditions can help make delayed puberty less likely.
A person who's malnourished — without enough food to eat or without good nutrients — may also develop later than peers who eat a healthy, balanced diet. For example, teens with the eating disorder anorexia nervosa often lose so much weight that their bodies can't develop properly. Girls who are extremely active in sports may be late developers because their level of exercise keeps them so lean. Girls' bodies need enough fat before they can go through puberty or get their periods.
Delayed puberty can also happen because of problems in the pituitary or thyroid glands. These glands make hormones important for body growth and development.
Some people who don't go through puberty at the normal time have problems with their chromosomes, which are made up of DNA that contain our body's construction plans. Problems with the chromosomes can affect normal growth processes. For example:

Turner syndrome happens when one of a female's two X chromosomes is abnormal or missing. This causes problems with how a girl grows and with the development of her ovaries and production of sex hormones. Women who have untreated Turner syndrome are shorter than normal, may not go through puberty in the usual way, and may have other medical problems.
Males with Klinefelter syndrome are born with an extra X chromosome (XXY instead of XY). This condition can slow sexual development. Guys who have it are typically tall for age, may have learning problems, and may have other medical problems.
How Is Delayed Puberty Diagnosed?
The good news is that if there is a problem, doctors usually can help teens with delayed puberty to develop more normally. If you're worried that you're not developing as you should, ask your parents to make an appointment with your doctor.

The doctor will:

Do an exam.
Take a medical history, including whether others in your family had a similar growth pattern.
Ask about any medicines you take.
Check your growth chart to see if there's a pattern that points to a problem.
The doctor also might:

Order blood tests to check for thyroid, pituitary, chromosomal, or other problems.
Order a bone age X-ray, to see if your bones are maturing normally.
How Is Delayed Puberty Treated?
Often, doctors find no underlying physical problem. Most teens with delayed puberty are just developing a bit later than average and will catch up.

If doctors do find a problem, they might send a teen to see a pediatric endocrinologist, a doctor who specializes in treating kids and teens who have growth problems, or to another specialist for further tests or treatment.

For some late bloomers, doctors may offer hormone treatment:

Guys might get a short course of treatment with testosterone (usually a monthly injection for 4–6 months) to get the changes of puberty started.
Girls might get low doses of estrogens for 4–6 months to start breast development.
After treatment ends, a teen's own hormones usually take over to complete the process of puberty. If they don't, the doctor will discuss long-term sex hormone replacement.

Dealing With Delayed Puberty
It can be tough to watch your friends grow and develop when the same thing's not happening to you. You may feel like you're never going to catch up. Even when the doctor or your parents reassure you that things will be OK, it's hard to wait for something that can affect how you feel about yourself.

If you're feeling depressed or having school or other problems, talk to your mom or dad, your doctor, or another trusted adult about finding a counselor or therapist you can talk to. They can help you sort out your feelings and suggest ways to cope with them.

Delayed puberty can be difficult for anyone to accept and deal with. But it's a problem that usually gets solved. Ask for help if you have any concerns about your development.

As you've probably noticed, puberty comes with all kinds of changes — including the way your body looks and even the way you might think it smells. These changes are a normal part of becoming a woman, but lots of girls worry about them.

Do I Smell — and Can People Tell?
Many girls wonder if they smell "down there" or if people notice when they have their periods. Some girls wonder if they should use douches, wipes, or any of the other products that claim to make women feel cleaner and fresher. But do these work? And does a girl really need them?

The truth is that when everything's normal, no one else smells any odors from a girl's vagina. If a girl has an infection like bacterial vaginosis, she may notice a fishy smell. But even then, it's unlikely that people around her will notice it. Girls who notice an unusual smell should see a doctor just in case they have an infection.

As far as periods go, if you change your pads or tampons frequently, shower or bathe daily, and wear clean clothes, no one can smell that either.

Should I Use Douches, Wipes, or Feminine Sprays?
No. Douches, feminine sprays, deodorants, and wipes that are meant to keep a woman's vaginal area smelling fresh and clean can do more harm than good. Douching means washing out the vagina, usually with a product you buy in a store. But it's not a good idea to douche (unless a doctor tells you to). Douching can cause allergic reactions, irritation, and even infections.

Feminine sprays, deodorants, and scented tampons aren't a good idea either. As with douching, they can lead to things like allergic reactions and irritation. Your vagina has its own natural cleaning system that flushes out bacteria, so you don't need to add any chemicals to help it.

Smells caused by infections need to be treated with prescription medicines. Perfumed sprays don't make infections go away, they just cover up the smell for a short time. If you notice a bad smell or think you may have an infection, see a doctor or go to a health clinic right away.

It's easy to keep your vagina clean without making it smell like a flower shop. You just need to shower or wash every day with a mild soap and plenty of warm water. Some girls like to take warm baths during their periods to help relieve cramps.

What Else Can Help Me Feel Fresh?
Wearing cotton underwear, especially in hot weather, can help a girl feel fresher because cotton and other natural fibers are more breathable.

During your period, change your pads or tampons often. It may be a good idea to keep a spare pair of underwear in your backpack to change into in case you happen to soak through your pad or tampon.

What Is Reproduction?
Reproduction is the process by which organisms make more organisms like themselves. But even though the reproductive system is essential to keeping a species alive, unlike other body systems, it's not essential to keeping an individual alive.

In the human reproductive process, two kinds of sex cells, or gametes (GAH-meetz), are involved. The male gamete, or sperm, and the female gamete, the egg or ovum, meet in the female's reproductive system. When sperm fertilizes (meets) an egg, this fertilized egg is called a zygote (pronounced: ZYE-goat). The zygote goes through a process of becoming an embryo and developing into a fetus.

The male reproductive system and the female reproductive system both are needed for reproduction.

Humans, like other organisms, pass some characteristics of themselves to the next generation. We do this through our genes, the special carriers of human traits. The genes that parents pass along are what make their children similar to others in their family, but also what make each child unique. These genes come from the male's sperm and the female's egg.

The Female Reproductive System
The Female Reproductive System
Like other living things, human beings reproduce. It's what keeps the population going.

In humans, this happens when the male and female reproductive systems work together to make a baby.

1
/
13

© 2024 The Nemours Foundation/KidsHealth. All rights reserved.
What Is the Female Reproductive System?
The external part of the female reproductive organs is called the vulva, which means covering. Located between the legs, the vulva covers the opening to the vagina and other reproductive organs inside the body.

The fleshy area located just above the top of the vaginal opening is called the mons pubis. Two pairs of skin flaps called the labia (which means lips) surround the vaginal opening. The clitoris, a small sensory organ, is located toward the front of the vulva where the folds of the labia join. Between the labia are openings to the urethra (the canal that carries pee from the bladder to the outside of the body) and vagina. When girls become sexually mature, the outer labia and the mons pubis are covered by pubic hair.

A female's internal reproductive organs are the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries.

The vagina is a muscular, hollow tube that extends from the vaginal opening to the uterus. Because it has muscular walls, the vagina can expand and contract. This ability to become wider or narrower allows the vagina to accommodate something as slim as a tampon and as wide as a baby. The vagina's muscular walls are lined with mucous membranes, which keep it protected and moist.

The vagina serves three purposes:

It's where the penis is inserted during sexual intercourse.
It's the pathway (the birth canal) through which a baby leaves a woman's body during childbirth.
It's the route through which menstrual blood leaves the body during periods.
A very thin piece of skin-like tissue called the hymen partly covers the opening of the vagina. Hymens are often different from female to female. Most women find their hymens have stretched or torn after their first sexual experience, and the hymen may bleed a little (this usually causes little, if any, pain). Some women who have had sex don't have much of a change in their hymens, though. And some women's hymens have already stretched even before they have sex.

The vagina connects with the uterus, or womb, at the cervix (which means neck). The cervix has strong, thick walls. The opening of the cervix is very small (no wider than a straw), which is why a tampon can never get lost inside a girl's body. During childbirth, the cervix can expand to allow a baby to pass.

The uterus is shaped like an upside-down pear, with a thick lining and muscular walls — in fact, the uterus contains some of the strongest muscles in the female body. These muscles are able to expand and contract to accommodate a growing fetus and then help push the baby out during labor. When a woman isn't pregnant, the uterus is only about 3 inches (7.5 centimeters) long and 2 inches (5 centimeters) wide.

At the upper corners of the uterus, the fallopian tubes connect the uterus to the ovaries. The ovaries are two oval-shaped organs that lie to the upper right and left of the uterus. They produce, store, and release eggs into the fallopian tubes in the process called ovulation (pronounced: av-yoo-LAY-shun).

There are two fallopian (pronounced: fuh-LO-pee-un) tubes, each attached to a side of the uterus. Within each tube is a tiny passageway no wider than a sewing needle. At the other end of each fallopian tube is a fringed area that looks like a funnel. This fringed area wraps around the ovary but doesn't completely attach to it. When an egg pops out of an ovary, it enters the fallopian tube. Once the egg is in the fallopian tube, tiny hairs in the tube's lining help push it down the narrow passageway toward the uterus.

The ovaries (pronounced: OH-vuh-reez) are also part of the endocrine system because they produce female sex hormones such as estrogen (pronounced: ESS-truh-jun) and progesterone (pronounced: pro-JESS-tuh-rone).

How Does the Female Reproductive System Work?
The female reproductive system enables a woman to:

produce eggs (ova)
have sexual intercourse
protect and nourish a fertilized egg until it is fully developed
give birth
Sexual reproduction couldn't happen without the sexual organs called the gonads. Most people think of the gonads as the male testicles. But both sexes have gonads: In females the gonads are the ovaries, which make female gametes (eggs). The male gonads make male gametes (sperm).

When a baby girl is born, her ovaries contain hundreds of thousands of eggs, which remain inactive until puberty begins. At puberty, the pituitary gland (in the central part of the brain) starts making hormones that stimulate the ovaries to make female sex hormones, including estrogen. The secretion of these hormones causes a girl to develop into a sexually mature woman.

Toward the end of puberty, girls begin to release eggs as part of a monthly period called the menstrual cycle. About once a month, during ovulation, an ovary sends a tiny egg into one of the fallopian tubes.

Unless the egg is fertilized by a sperm while in the fallopian tube, the egg leaves the body about 2 weeks later through the uterus — this is menstruation. Blood and tissues from the inner lining of the uterus combine to form the menstrual flow, which in most girls lasts from 3 to 5 days. A girl's first period is called menarche (pronounced: MEH-nar-kee).

It's common for women and girls to have some discomfort in the days leading to their periods. Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) includes both physical and emotional symptoms that many girls and women get right before their periods, such as:

acne
bloating
tiredness
backaches
sore breasts
headaches
constipation
diarrhea
food cravings
depression
irritability
trouble concentrating or handling stress
PMS is usually at its worst during the 7 days before a girl's period starts and disappears after it begins.

Many girls also have belly cramps during the first few days of their periods caused by prostaglandins, chemicals in the body that make the smooth muscle in the uterus contract. These involuntary contractions can be dull or sharp and intense.

It can take up to 2 years from menarche for a girl's body to develop a regular menstrual cycle. During that time, her body is adjusting to the hormones puberty brings. On average, the monthly cycle for an adult woman is 28 days, but the range is from 23 to 35 days.

What Happens If an Egg Is Fertilized?
If a female and male have sex within several days of the female's ovulation, fertilization can happen. When the male ejaculates (when semen leaves the penis), a small amount of semen is deposited into the vagina. Millions of sperm are in this small amount of semen, and they "swim" up from the vagina through the cervix and uterus to meet the egg in the fallopian tube. It takes only one sperm to fertilize the egg.

About 5 to 6 days after the sperm fertilizes the egg, the fertilized egg (pronounced: zygote) has become a multicelled blastocyst. A blastocyst (pronounced: BLAS-tuh-sist) is about the size of a pinhead, and it's a hollow ball of cells with fluid inside. The blastocyst burrows itself into the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium. The hormone estrogen causes the endometrium (pronounced: en-doh-MEE-tree-um) to become thick and rich with blood. Progesterone, another hormone released by the ovaries, keeps the endometrium thick with blood so that the blastocyst can attach to the uterus and absorb nutrients from it. This process is called implantation.

As cells from the blastocyst take in nourishment, another stage of development begins. In the embryonic stage, the inner cells form a flattened circular shape called the embryonic disk, which will develop into a baby. The outer cells become thin membranes that form around the baby. The cells multiply thousands of times and move to new positions to eventually become the embryo (pronounced: EM-bree-oh).

After about 8 weeks, the embryo is about the size of a raspberry, but almost all of its parts — the brain and nerves, the heart and blood, the stomach and intestines, and the muscles and skin — have formed.

During the fetal stage, which lasts from 9 weeks after fertilization to birth, development continues as cells multiply, move, and change. The fetus (pronounced: FEE-tis) floats in amniotic (pronounced: am-nee-AH-tik) fluid inside the amniotic sac. The fetus gets oxygen and nourishment from the mother's blood via the placenta (pronounced: pluh-SEN-tuh). This disk-like structure sticks to the inner lining of the uterus and connects to the fetus via the umbilical (pronounced: um-BIL-ih-kul) cord. The amniotic fluid and membrane cushion the fetus against bumps and jolts to the mother's body.

Pregnancy lasts an average of 280 days — about 9 months. When the baby is ready for birth, its head presses on the cervix, which begins to relax and widen to get ready for the baby to pass into and through the vagina. Mucus has formed a plug in the cervix, which now loosesn. It and amniotic fluid come out through the vagina when the mother's water breaks.

When the contractions of labor begin, the walls of the uterus contract as they are stimulated by the pituitary hormone oxytocin (pronounced: ahk-see-TOE-sin). The contractions cause the cervix to widen and begin to open. After several hours of this widening, the cervix is dilated (opened) enough for the baby to come through. The baby is pushed out of the uterus, through the cervix, and along the birth canal. The baby's head usually comes first. The umbilical cord comes out with the baby. It's clamped and cut close to the navel after the baby is delivered.

The last stage of the birth process involves the delivery of the placenta, which at that point is called the afterbirth. After it has separated from the inner lining of the uterus, contractions of the uterus push it out, along with its membranes and fluids.

What Is Gynecomastia?
Sometimes, guys develop breasts during puberty. This is called gynecomastia (pronounced: guy-nuh-ko-MAS-tee-uh). It's usually due to normal hormone changes during puberty, and almost always goes away on its own within a few months to a couple of years.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Gynecomastia?
Gynecomastia causes breast enlargement. It can happen in one or both breasts. Sometimes a small, rubbery lump can be felt under the nipple. The breast area might feel sore, especially in the months after gynecomastia begins.

What Causes Gynecomastia?
Puberty is the main cause of gynecomastia in adolescent boys. Hormones are chemical messengers. The ones involved in puberty can get out of balance and lead to gynecomastia.

Some medicines, drugs (including alcohol, marijuana, amphetamines, and heroin), anabolic steroids (taken to build muscle and improve strength), and other medicines also can cause gynecomastia. The herbal supplements tea tree oil and lavender oil may also lead to gynecomastia. Rarely, gynecomastia can be a sign of other medical conditions.

There's also something called pseudogynecomastia (or false gynecomastia). This has nothing to do with puberty or hormones. It's when some guys have extra fat in the chest area that makes it look like they have breasts. A health care provider's exam can tell whether a guy has gynecomastia or pseudogynecomastia.

Who Gets Gynecomastia?
About half of all guys going through puberty get gynecomastia in one or both breasts.

How Is Gynecomastia Diagnosed?
Health care providers diagnose gynecomastia by asking questions and doing an exam. Usually no other testing is needed, but sometimes blood tests are done.

How Is Gynecomastia Treated?
Gynecomastia usually goes away without medical treatment. The breasts flatten out within a few months to a couple of years.

If gynecomastia is very severe, there is medicine that can help. And if gynecomastia lasts past puberty, surgery can reduce the size of the breasts.

What Can I Do?
Even though it's just a temporary change for most teens, some guys with gynecomastia might feel embarrassed or self-conscious about their appearance. Many guys find that wearing loose-fitting shirts helps make it less noticeable until the breasts shrink.

If you have gynecomastia and it really bothers you, or has lasted more than about 2 years, talk to your health care provider about possible treatments.

Testicular self-exams (TSE) can help you check for things like cancer. Although testicular cancer is rare in teenage guys, overall it is the most common cancer in males between the ages of 15 and 35.

It's important to try to do a TSE every month so you can become familiar with the normal size and shape of your testicles, making it easier to tell if something feels different in the future.

Tell your doctor right away if you notice any swelling, lumps, or changes in the size or color of a testicle. Also tell your doctor if you have any pain or achy areas in your groin.

Lumps or swelling may not be cancer, but they should be checked by your doctor as soon as possible.

Testicular cancer is almost always curable if it is caught and treated early.
Tell your doctor right away if you notice any swelling, lumps, or changes in the size or color of a testicle. Also tell your doctor if you have any pain or achy areas in your groin.

Lumps or swelling may not be cancer, but they should be checked by your doctor as soon as possible.

Testicular cancer is almost always curable if it is caught and treated early.

What Are Irregular Periods?
Even though girls get their periods on a cycle, that cycle can take different amounts of time each month. For example, a girl might get her period after 24 days one month and after 42 days the next. These are called irregular periods.

Irregular periods are very common, especially in a girl's first few years of getting her period.

What Are Regular Periods?
Most girls get their first period between the ages of 10 and 15, but some get it earlier and some later. The first period is known as menarche (pronounced: MEN-ar-kee).

A girl's monthly cycle is the number of days from the start of her period to the start of the next time she gets her period. You often hear this is a 28-day cycle. But 28 is just an average figure that doctors use. Cycle lengths vary — some are 24 days, some are 34 days. And a girl may notice that her cycles are different lengths each month — especially for the few years after she first starts getting her period.

Early in a girl's cycle, her ovaries start preparing one egg. At the same time, the lining of the uterus becomes thick to prepare a nesting place for a fertilized egg in the event that the girl becomes pregnant.

About 2 weeks before a girl gets her period, the egg is released from the ovary (this is called ovulation). The egg travels through the fallopian tube into the uterus. If the egg isn't fertilized by sperm, it starts to fall apart. Then the lining and egg leave a girl's body as her period and the whole thing starts all over again — that's why we use the word "cycle." The first day a girl's period comes is Day 1 of her cycle.

A girl's body may not follow an exact schedule. It's common, especially in the first 2 years after a girl starts getting her period, to skip periods or to have irregular periods. Illness, rapid weight change, or stress can also make things more unpredictable. That's because the part of the brain that regulates periods is influenced by events like these. Going on a trip or having a major change in schedule can also make your period come at a different time than expected. All of this is perfectly normal.

It's also normal for the number of days a girl has her period to vary. Sometimes a girl may bleed for 2 days, sometimes it may last a week. That's because the level of hormones the body makes can be different from one cycle to the next, and this affects the amount and length of bleeding.

If My Period Is Irregular, How Do I Know When I Will Get It?
If your cycle is not regular, you'll want to pay attention to the clues your body may give you that your period is coming soon. These may include:

back cramps or stiffness
heavier breasts or breast soreness
headaches
acne breakouts
disturbed sleep patterns
mood swings
bloating
loose stools
How Can I Be Prepared?
Keep some pads or tampons in your backpack or purse, just so you'll have them handy in case your period comes when you're not expecting it. You may even want to carry an extra pair of underwear.

What Causes Irregular Periods?
Most of the time, irregular periods are part of the normal changes that can happen when you're a teen. As you get older, your cycle will probably settle into a recognizable pattern.

Sometimes, irregular periods can be caused by some medicines, exercising too much, having a very low or high body weight, or not eating enough calories.

Hormone imbalances can also cause irregular periods. For example, thyroid hormone levels that are too low or too high can cause problems with periods. Some girls have extra androgen, a hormone that can cause hair growth on the face, chin, chest, and abdomen. Extra androgen can also makes girls gain weight and have irregular periods.

Girls who are pregnant also will not get their periods.

Should I Worry About Irregular Periods?
Talk to your doctor if you have had sex and have missed a period because you could be pregnant. Also let the doctor know if:

You were having regular periods that then become irregular.
You stop getting your period.
You have extra hair growth on the face, chin, chest, or abdomen.
You start having periods that last longer than 7 days, are heavy, or are coming more often than every 21 days.
Your period comes less often than every 45 days.
You have severe cramping or abdominal pain.
You have bleeding in between your periods.
Your periods are irregular for 3 years or more.
The doctor may prescribe hormone pills or other medicines, or recommend lifestyle changes that can help you to have regular periods.

Erections are a normal part of the way the male body works, mainly during puberty.

What Is an Erection?
An erection is when the penis gets hard because sponge-like tissue in it fills with blood. Erections tend to make the penis get bigger and stand away from the body.

Erections can go away on their own or after ejaculation (the release of semen through the small hole at the tip of the penis).

Ejaculating at night during sleep is called a nocturnal emission or “wet dream.” You can have several erections each night during sleep.

What Causes Erections?
The hormones (chemical messengers) that trigger puberty cause a lot of changes in the body. One of these is erections.

Many erections are caused by sexual arousal, like watching a sexy show or having a fantasy. But a lot of erections seem to happen for no real reason.

If you've had an erection at an odd time — like in the middle of a boring lesson — there's nothing wrong with you. Your body is acting normally for someone your age.

Am I Getting Too Many Erections?
Everyone is different, so there’s not a "normal" number of erections. Some people have many of them each day. Others don’t have any.

The hormones that cause erections change with age, how far you are into puberty, how active you are, and even the amount of sleep you get. Unless your erections bother you or are painful, don't worry about how many you have. But if you're concerned, talk with your doctor.

Can I Avoid Getting Erections?
You can't really control erections, so there's not much you can do to avoid getting them. Sometimes erections can happen when you least expect them or you really don’t want one. If you're around other people, try thinking about something else. To hide it, try to shift your position, readjust your clothes to cover it, or excuse yourself to go to the bathroom if needed.

As your hormones settle down and you go through puberty, you should get fewer unexpected erections and wet dream

Is My Penis Normal?
en español: ¿Es normal mi pene?
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
Just about every guy wonders how he measures up "down-there." Here's the lowdown for any guy who's ever worried about whether his penis is a normal size.

There is a wide range of normal penis sizes. Although you may see guys with penises that are bigger or smaller than yours, it is very likely that your penis is a normal size. Penis size is determined by your genes , just like eye color or foot size. And there's a lot less difference in penis size between guys when they get an erection than when their penises are relaxed.

Despite what you may hear or read, no special exercises, supplements, or diets will change a guy's penis size.

The penis grows the most during puberty. Some boys start puberty around 9 and others don't start until they are 15. Usually by the end of puberty, a guy's penis has reached its expected size. Puberty usually ends about 4 years after it starts, so this is usually around age 13–19.

In addition to size, guys also wonder about how their penis looks. For example, a guy might wonder if the skin covering the penis is normal or if it's OK for a guy's penis to hang to the left or right (it is!).

If you're concerned about how your penis looks, ask your doctor. Teen guys should have testicular exams every year at their regular checkup. So that's a good time to ask your doctor any questions.

Male Reproductive System
en español: Aparato reproductor masculino
Medically reviewed by: KidsHealth Medical Experts
Learn About Primary Care Pediatrics at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
What Is Reproduction?
Reproduction is the process by which organisms make more organisms like themselves. But even though the reproductive system is essential to keeping a species alive, unlike other body systems, it's not essential to keeping an individual alive.

In the human reproductive process, two kinds of sex cells, or gametes (pronounced: GAH-meetz), are involved. The male gamete, or sperm, and the female gamete, the egg or ovum, meet in the female's reproductive system. When sperm fertilizes (meets) an egg, this fertilized egg is called a zygote (pronounced: ZYE-goat). The zygote goes through a process of becoming an embryo and developing into a fetus.

The male reproductive system and the female reproductive system both are needed for reproduction.

Humans, like other organisms, pass some characteristics of themselves to the next generation. We do this through our genes, the special carriers of human traits. The genes that parents pass along are what make their children similar to others in their family, but also what make each child unique. These genes come from the male's sperm and the female's egg.

What Is the Male Reproductive System?
The male has reproductive organs, or genitals, that are both inside and outside the pelvis. The male genitals include:

the testicles (pronounced: TESS-tih-kulz)
the duct system, which is made up of the epididymis and the vas deferens
the accessory glands, which include the seminal vesicles and prostate gland
the penis
In a guy who has reached sexual maturity, the two oval-shaped testicles, or testes (pronounced: TESS-teez) make and store millions of tiny sperm cells.

The testicles are also part of the endocrine system because they make hormones, including testosterone (pronounced: tess-TOSS-tuh-rone). Testosterone is a major part of puberty in guys. As a guy makes his way through puberty, his testicles produce more and more of it. Testosterone is the hormone that causes boys to develop deeper voices, bigger muscles, and body and facial hair. It also stimulates the production of sperm.

Alongside the testicles are the epididymis and the vas deferens, which transport sperm. The epididymis (pronounced: ep-uh-DID-uh-miss) and the testicles hang in a pouch-like structure outside the pelvis called the scrotum. This bag of skin helps to regulate the temperature of testicles, which need to be kept cooler than body temperature to produce sperm. The scrotum changes size to maintain the right temperature. When the body is cold, the scrotum shrinks and becomes tighter to hold in body heat. When it's warm, it gets larger and floppier to get rid of extra heat. This happens without a guy ever having to think about it. The brain and the nervous system give the scrotum the cue to change size.

The accessory glands, including the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland, provide fluids that lubricate the duct system and nourish the sperm. The urethra (pronounced: yoo-REE-thruh) is the channel that carries the sperm (in fluid called semen) to the outside of the body through the penis. The urethra is also part of the urinary system because it is also the channel through which pee passes as it leaves the bladder and exits the body.

The penis is actually made up of two parts: the shaft and the glans. The shaft is the main part of the penis and the glans is the tip (sometimes called the head). At the end of the glans is a small slit or opening, which is where semen and pee exit the body through the urethra. The inside of the penis is made of a spongy tissue that can expand and contract.

Click through this slideshow to see how the male reproductive system works.
The Male Reproductive System
Like other living things, human beings reproduce. It's what keeps the population going. 

1
/
11

© 2024 The Nemours Foundation/KidsHealth. All rights reserved.
All boys are born with a foreskin, a fold of skin at the end of the penis covering the glans. Some boys are circumcised, which means that a doctor or clergy member cuts away the foreskin. Circumcision is usually done during a baby boy's first few days of life. It's not medically necessary, but parents who choose to have their sons circumcised often do so based on religious beliefs, concerns about hygiene, or cultural or social reasons. Guys who have circumcised penises and those who don't are no different: All penises work and feel the same, regardless of whether the foreskin has been removed.

How Does the Male Reproductive System Work?
The male reproductive system:

makes semen (pronounced: SEE-mun)
releases semen into the reproductive system of the female during sexual intercourse
produces sex hormones, which help a boy develop into a sexually mature man during puberty
When a baby boy is born, he has all the parts of his reproductive system in place, but it isn't until puberty that he is able to reproduce. When puberty begins, usually between the ages of 9 and 15, the pituitary gland — located near the brain — secretes hormones that stimulate the testicles to produce testosterone. The production of testosterone brings about many physical changes.

Although the timing of these changes is different for every guy, the stages of puberty generally follow a set sequence:

During the first stage of male puberty, the scrotum and testes grow larger.
Next, the penis becomes longer and the seminal vesicles and prostate gland grow.
Hair begins to grow in the pubic area and later on the face and underarms. During this time, the voice also deepens.
Guys also have a growth spurt during puberty as they reach their adult height and weight.
What Do Sperm Do?
A male who has reached puberty will produce millions of sperm cells every day. Each sperm is extremely small: only 1/600 of an inch (0.05 millimeters long). Sperm develop in the testicles within a system of tiny tubes called the seminiferous tubules. At birth, these tubules contain simple round cells. During puberty, testosterone and other hormones cause these cells to transform into sperm cells. The cells divide and change until they have a head and short tail, like tadpoles. The head contains genetic material (genes). The sperm move into the epididymis, where they complete their development.

The sperm then move to the vas deferens (pronounced: VAS DEF-uh-runz), or sperm duct. The seminal vesicles and prostate gland make a whitish fluid called seminal fluid, which mixes with sperm to form semen when a male is sexually stimulated. The penis, which usually hangs limp, becomes hard when a male is sexually excited. Tissues in the penis fill with blood and it becomes stiff and erect (an erection). The rigidity of the erect penis makes it easier to insert into the female's vagina during sex. When the erect penis is stimulated, muscles around the reproductive organs contract and force the semen through the duct system and urethra. Semen is pushed out of the male's body through his urethra — this process is called ejaculation. Each time a guy ejaculates, it can contain up to 500 million sperm.

What Is Conception?
If semen is ejaculated into a female's vagina, millions of sperm "swim" up from the vagina through the cervix and uterus to meet the egg in the fallopian tube. It takes only one sperm to fertilize the egg.

This fertilized egg is now called a zygote and contains 46 chromosomes — half from the egg and half from the sperm. Genetic material from the male and female combine so that a new individual can be created. The zygote divides again and again as it grows in the female's uterus, maturing over the course of the pregnancy into an embryo, a fetus, and finally a newborn baby.

A girl's periods can cause some uncomfortable symptoms. Most of the time, there's no reason for concern. But some problems need care from your doctor.

Here's how to cope with most period problems.

What Is Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS)?
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is when a girl has mood and body changes before or during her period. It's usually at its worst during the 4 days before a period. PMS usually goes away 2 to 3 days after the period begins.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of PMS?
A girl with PMS might have:

sadness
mood swings
crankiness
anxiety
tiredness
food cravings
pimples
bloating
backaches
sore breasts
headaches
constipation
diarrhea
What Can Help if I Have PMS?
You can try these things if you have PMS symptoms:

To help with food cravings: Eat a balanced diet with lots of fresh fruit and vegetables.
To ease bloating: Lower salt in your diet.
To ease crankiness or anxiety: Avoid caffeine and get plenty of exercise.
To help with backache, headache, or sore breasts: Try a warm heating pad or acetaminophen (Tylenol or store brand), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, or store brand), or naproxen (Aleve or store brand).
To relax: Try yoga or meditation.
To prevent and treat pimples: Work with a dermatologist (skin doctor).
When Should I Call the Doctor?
If your PMS is severe, your doctor can help with treatments, including medicine. Call the doctor if you:

don't feel better after trying home treatments
feel very sad or hopeless
ever think about hurting or killing yourself
can't do your usual activities because of your PMS symptoms
have PMS symptoms that don't go away after the first few days of your period
What Are Period Cramps?
Period cramps are pain in the lower belly during a girl's period. Many girls have cramps during the first few days of their periods. Period cramps are caused by prostaglandin, a chemical in the body that makes the muscle in the uterus contract.

What Can Help if I Have Cramps?
If cramps bother you, try:

a warm heating pad on your belly
taking ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, or store brand) or naproxen (Aleve or store brand); this works best if the medicine is started at the first sign of cramps
When Should I Call the Doctor?
Call your doctor if:

severe cramps keep you home from school or doing your usual activities
the cramps do not get better with ibuprofen or naproxen
What Are Irregular Periods?
Irregular periods are when a girl or woman does not get a period about every 4–5 weeks. In the first 2 years after a girl starts getting her period, it is normal for the cycles to be irregular. But by about 2 years after periods start, they should be on a regular cycle.

What Can Help?
Track your periods so you know if they are regular. Record when your period comes, how long it lasts, and any problems you have during it. You can use a calendar or an app, or write it down in a notebook.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
Call the doctor if you:

have had your period for 2 years and still don't get it about every 4–5 weeks
get your period regularly, but then don't get it for 3 months
get your period regularly, but then it becomes irregular
have periods that are very heavy (you go through more than one pad or tampon an hour)
have periods that last longer than about a week
Looking Ahead
Most girls settle into a regular period schedule and can manage any bothersome symptoms with home treatment. But talk to the doctor if you think there could be a problem with your periods.

Puberty is the time when kids grow into young adults through physical and emotional changes. This doesn’t happen all at once, but slowly over time. It's good to know about the changes that come along with puberty so you know what to expect.

When Does Puberty Start?
Most females will start puberty when they’re 8 to 13 years old, and most males will start between 9 and 14. But it can also be normal to start earlier or later.

How Does Puberty Start?
Hormones from the brain trigger the start of puberty. Hormones are chemical messengers that tell the body what to do.

In males: The hormones tell the testicles to make the hormone testosterone and sperm.

In females: The hormones tell the ovaries to make the hormone estrogen and triggers the growth and release of eggs.

Other puberty hormones come from the adrenal glands, a pair of glands that sit at the top of the kidneys. These hormones lead to the growth of pubic and underarm hair, body odor, and acne.

What Physical Changes Happen During Puberty?
The physical changes that happen during puberty are different for males and females.

Males
For a male, the physical changes of puberty usually start with the testicles getting bigger. Dark, coarse, curly hair will sprout just above the penis and on the scrotum. The penis and testes will get larger, and erections happen more often. Ejaculation — the release of sperm-containing semen —also happens. Ejaculation during sleep is called a “wet dream” or nocturnal emission.

Later, hair will grow under the arms and in the beard area. And that first crack in the voice is a sign that the voice is changing and will get deeper. Some males get some breast growth (called gynecomastia). It usually goes away in 6 to 18 months.

Their body shape begins to change as their shoulders broaden and they gain weight and muscle. A growth spurt usually happens between ages 12 and 15. By age 16, most males have stopped growing, but their muscles will continue to develop.

Females
For most females, the first physical change of puberty is breast development. It starts with small, firm, tender lumps (called buds) under one or both nipples. The breasts will get larger over the next year or two. Dark, coarse, curly hair will appear on the labia (the folds of skin surrounding the vagina). Later, more hair will grow in the pubic area and under the arms.

Their body shape begins to change as their hips widen and they gain weight and body fat. Expect the first period (menstruation) about 2 years after breast buds appear, usually between the ages of 9 and 16. Most females have a growth spurt about 1–2 years before their period starts. After they get their period, most females grow about 1–2 more inches before growth stops.

What Emotional Changes Happen During Puberty?
Just as those hormones change the way your body looks on the outside, they also change how you feel on the inside. While your body is adjusting to all the new hormones, so is your mind. During puberty, you might feel confused or have strong emotions that you've never had before. You may feel anxious about how your changing body looks. You might feel get upset or lose your temper more than usual.

It's easy to feel embarrassed or anxious when talking about these topics, but you need the right information. If you aren’t comfortable talking to your parents, you might talk to your doctor, a school nurse, a teacher, or a school counselor.

What Else Should I Know?
Even though everyone goes through puberty, we all go through it a little differently. Some of your friends might have gotten curves, but you haven't yet. Maybe your best friend's voice has changed, and you think you still sound like a kid. But eventually everyone catches up, and the differences will even out.

Keep in mind that there is no right or wrong way to look. We are all unique, on the inside and the outside.

Why Do I Need to Take Care of My Body?
Learning how to take care of your body is part of growing up. As you get older, your body will change as you become a man. This is called puberty. During puberty, you will get:

oily skin and hair
hair that grows on your face (above your lip and on your cheeks, chin, and neck), under your arms, on your legs, and in your private area (the part of your body covered by your underwear)
sweat that smells stinky, especially under your arms
a deeper voice
erections, ejaculation, and wet dreams. An erection is when your penis gets bigger and harder. If a sticky liquid called semen comes out of your penis, it is called an ejaculation. If you ejaculate at night in your sleep, it is called a wet dream.
These changes will happen slowly. You will have to learn new routines to keep yourself clean and healthy.

Puberty: What Happens? Voice - Your voice deepens. Sweat- Your armpits sweat. Hair - Hair grows on your face, arms, legs, chest, armpits, and between your legs. Height - You get taller. Face - You may get pimples. Privates - Your penis and testicles get bigger.

What Should I Do Every Day?
To stay smelling fresh and clean, you should:

Put on clean underwear and clothes every day.
Wash your hands and face every day with soap and water. Use a towel to dry off.
Take a shower or bath by yourself. You can wash all your body parts and your hair. 
Use deodorant every day. This will make your underarms less sweaty and stinky.
Brush your teeth at least twice a day and floss every day. This will help prevent bad breath and cavities.
What About Shaving?
As the hair grows on your face, you may want to shave it. Ask a parent or other trusted adult how to use a razor.

It may take time to get used to how it feels to shave. Electric razors are noisy and might tickle a little. Other razors are sharp and can cut you if you are not careful. Be careful when using a razor.

What If I Have an Erection, Ejaculation, or Wet Dream?
All boys have erections, ejaculations, and wet dreams. They are normal and part of growing up.

If you wake up in the morning and your underwear and sheets are wet and sticky, you had a wet dream. Take off your dirty underwear and pajamas. Remove your dirty sheets. Wash yourself and put on clean underwear and clothes.

What Kind of Underwear Should I Wear?
Choose underwear that is comfortable for you.

Some boys like boxer shorts because they are easy to put on and take off. Other boys like briefs because they feel more supported when walking, running, or jumping around.

Try different kinds of underwear until you find the ones that are right for you.

This Feels Like a Lot to Learn! How Can I Remember?
Having a new daily routine may take some getting used to. Here are some ways to remember what to do:

Make a schedule so you know when to wash your face, shave, or take a shower.
Use a picture chart or list that tells the steps for getting washed in the morning.
Put numbers on the supplies you use, like soap, shampoo, and deodorant, so you know what to use first and what comes next.
Be Prepared!
Be prepared each day by making special kits with all the supplies you need for taking care of yourself. Make a kit for your morning routine that has soap, a toothbrush, toothpaste, mouthwash, deodorant, and a brush for your hair. You can have another kit with all your shaving supplies.

Ask your mom or dad to help you put your kits together. Choose things that you like. If you don't like the smell or the feel of some of the supplies, you can go back to the store to buy something different. You have many choices. Pick whatever is best for you.

Why Do I Need to Take Care of My Body?
Learning how to take care of your body is part of growing up. As you get older, your body will change as you become a woman. This is called puberty. During puberty, you will get:

oily skin and hair
hair that grows under your arms, on your legs, and in your private area (the part of your body that is covered by underwear)
sweat that smells stinky, especially under your arms
breasts
your period, also called menstruation. This is when blood comes out of your vagina, but you are not sick or hurt.
These changes will happen slowly. You will have to learn new routines to keep yourself clean and healthy.

Puberty: What Happens? Height - You get taller. Breasts - Your breasts grow. Hair - Hair grows in your armpits, on your legs, and between your legs. Face - You may get pimples. Sweat - Your armpits sweat. Menstruation - Your period begins.

What Should I Do Every Day?
To stay smelling fresh and clean, you should:

Put on clean underwear and clothes every day.
Wash your hands and face every day with soap and water. Use a towel to dry off.
Take a shower or bath by yourself. You can wash all your body parts and your hair.
Use deodorant every day. This will make your underarms less sweaty and stinky.
Brush your teeth at least twice a day and floss once a day. This will help prevent bad breath and cavities.
What About Shaving?
Some girls shave the hair that grows under their arms and on their legs. If you want to shave it, ask a parent or other trusted adult how to use a razor. If you don’t want to shave, that’s OK too.

It may take time to get used to how it feels to shave. Electric razors are noisy and might tickle a little. Other razors are sharp and can cut you if you are not careful. Be careful when using a razor.

What About Wearing a Bra?
When you have breasts, a bra is a good idea. Bras support the breasts. Some girls feel more comfortable wearing a bra, especially when running or jumping around. If you've never worn a bra before, it might feel uncomfortable at first. With a little time, you should get used to it.

Ask your mom or another trusted adult to help you shop for a bra. There are lots of different kinds of bras. Look for a soft bra without seams, tags, or itchy lace. Try different ones until you find a bra that's right for you.

What Happens When My Period Comes?
When you get your period, you will see blood on your underwear, on toilet paper, or in the toilet bowl. Your period will come about once a month. It usually lasts about 3 to 7 days. Mark your calendar each month when you get your period. This way, you'll know when to expect it the next month.

When you have your period, you need to wear a special pad in your underwear to catch the blood. Your mother or other trusted adult will teach you how to use one.

There are many different kinds of pads. You can choose the ones that are most comfortable for you to wear.

How Do I Wear Pads?
To put on a new pad, peel the paper off the back of the new pad. Place the sticky side of the pad in your underwear. Make sure it stays in place. Change your pad about every 4 hours, when it smells, or when it is full of blood.

To change your pad, pull off the old one. Roll it up in toilet paper and throw it away in the bathroom trash can. Change your underwear if it is dirty. Then, put a new pad in your underwear.

This Feels Like a Lot to Learn! How Can I Remember?
Having a new daily routine may take some getting used to. Here are some ways to remember what to do:

Make a schedule so you know when to wash your face, brush your teeth, or take a shower.
Use a picture chart or list that tells the steps for putting on and taking off pads.
Number supplies you use — like soap, shampoo, and deodorant — so you know what to use first and what comes next.
Make it Fun!
Be prepared each day by making special kits with all the supplies you need for taking care of yourself. Ask your mom or dad to help you put your kits together.

You might make one kit for your morning routine that has soap, moisturizer, a toothbrush, toothpaste, mouthwash, deodorant, and a brush and other items for your hair. You can make another kit for when you have your period that has pads, wipes, and clean underwear.

If you don't like the smell or the feel of some of the supplies, you can go back to the store to buy something different. You have many choices. Pick whatever is best for you.

When you were younger, your parents made the decisions about your health. They set up your doctor visits and did all the talking for you. Now that you're older, you know more about your body and mind. You probably want to make some health choices yourself.

It’s good to be as involved as you can. People who play a role in their own care make better decisions. They stay healthier.

What’s the best way to start? By talking with your doctor.

Begin With Answering Questions
Anytime you go to the doctor, you can use it as a chance to answer questions instead of looking to your parent to do it for you. As you do more of the talking, your parent can do less. Most parents feel proud to see you take the lead.

Questions to Ask Your Doctor

As you get older, your doctor or nurse will probably see you alone for part of the visit while your parent waits. Little by little, you start to play a bigger part in your own health care.

What Should I Talk to My Doctor About?
If you go to the doctor because you’re sick or think you have a health problem, you’ll talk about your symptoms. If you have an injury, you’ll explain how you got hurt. In addition to answering the health provider's questions, you can also ask your own.

For people who have a health condition (for example, diabetes or asthma) talking with your doctor or nurse is the best way to learn to manage it well. Ask questions if there’s something you don’t understand. Use a notes app to keep a record of anything you need to remember.

You can talk to your health provider about any topic related to your health. This includes your mental health.

Problems with your mental health can affect your physical health, too. Your doctor will want to know about anything you’re going through. For example, let them know if you’re going through a problem such as bullying, stress, violence, or abuse. Or if you’re dealing with depression, anger, anxiety, or an eating disorder. If you’ve been through a trauma, share that too.

No matter what problem you’re dealing with, talking about it with a doctor or nurse can be the first step to getting the help you need. They can ask the right questions, listen, and offer ideas. They can prescribe treatments for you and refer you to a specialist if you need one.

Talking with a doctor helps you learn to take good care of your health, get help with problems, and be as healthy as you can be.

Tampons, Pads, and Other Period Supplies
en español: Tampones, compresas y otros suministros para la menstruación
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
When you get your period, you'll need to use something to soak up the menstrual blood. There are lots of different products out there. It might take some experimenting to find what's right for you.

Most girls use on or more of these:

pads (or sanitary napkins)
tampons
menstrual cups
What Are Pads?
Pads are rectangles of absorbent material that attach to the inside of a girl's underwear and catch menstrual blood. They're sometimes also called sanitary pads or sanitary napkins. Some pads have extra material on the sides. These "wings" fold over the edges of your underwear to help hold the pad in place and prevent leaking.

There are many different types of pads, including:

super
slender
overnight
scented
maxi
mini
Some girls have heavier bleeding with their periods and others have lighter bleeding. And most girls have a light days and heavier days. Pads can vary by size or by absorbency. You want to try to find a pad that is big enough that you don't worry about leaking through, but is small enough to be comfortable. It might take a little bit of experimenting to find the right pad for the different times of your period.

Some pads are scented or come with a deodorant in them. But these can irritate the vagina or cause an allergic reaction in some girls.

How Do You Use Pads?
Pads should be changed every 3–4 hours, even if you have a light flow. Regular changing prevents buildup of bacteria and stops odor. If you have a heavier flow, you might need to change pads more often to make sure you don't leak.

There are two types of pads that do the same job, but are used a little bit differently.

Disposable pads. Most pads have a sticky strip along the bottom. You peel off the paper strip that covers the adhesive and press the pad into the crotch of your underwear. If the pad has wings, you wrap these around the bottom of the crotch.

To remove the pad, unstick it from your underwear and wrap it in toilet paper. Put it in the trash can or in the special disposal box that's found in most bathroom stalls. Don't try to flush a pad down the toilet because the toilet can become clogged and make a big mess.
Reusable pads. These pads are washed after each time you wear them. They're sold in natural health stores and online. These kinds of pads snap or clip onto a girl's underwear. Girls might use these pads because they feel they're better for the environment or to save money. It's all a matter of personal preference.
What Are Tampons?
Tampons absorb blood from inside the vagina. A tampon is also made of absorbent material, but it's compressed into a small tube. Tampons come in different sizes and absorbencies for heavier and lighter periods.

Tampons also can come with or without deodorant. There's no need for deodorant in a tampon, though, because changing tampons regularly usually gets rid of any odor. The deodorant in tampons can irritate the vagina, and could cause an allergic reaction in some girls.

Some tampons come with an applicator. An applicator is a plastic or cardboard tube that guides the tampon into the vagina. Other tampons are inserted using a finger.

Some girls find that a slender size, applicator-style tampon is easier to use when they first start their periods. An applicator with a rounded top can be especially helpful for beginners. The first time you use a tampon, try to do so on a heavier flow day. This will make the tampon slip in easier.

How Do You Use Tampons?
A tampon is put into the vagina using an applicator or a finger. After washing your hands, follow the directions that come with the tampons carefully and be sure to relax.

It's very important to change tampons every few hours and that you wear the absorbency type that is right for you. Change a tampon every 4–6 hours or when it's saturated with blood.

Tampons have a string attached to one end that stays outside a girl's body. To remove the tampon, pull gently on the string until the tampon comes out. Wrap it in toilet paper and throw it in the trash.

Don't flush a tampon down the toilet. Even when the box says a tampon is flushable, tampons can still cause problems in some plumbing systems.

Because you can't see a tampon, you'll need to remember when it's time to change. If you forget to change it, you may get spotting or leakage on your underwear or clothing.

If it's time to change your tampon and you can't find the string, don't worry! The tampon is still there. Reach in with your fingers to find the string. It may take a minute to do because the string might be a bit hard to grab.

Some girls worry that tampons can get lost inside their bodies. But there is no way for this to happen. The vagina holds a tampon in place and the opening of the cervix (located at the top of the vagina) is too tiny for a tampon to get through.

It's important to change tampons often. A tampon that's left in too long won't get lost. But a girl may get a discharge, odor, or an infection. And never put a tampon in and leave it in all day or all night, even if you have a light period. Doing this puts girls at risk for a rare but very dangerous disease called toxic shock syndrome (TSS).

What Is a Menstrual Cup?
Like a tampon, a menstrual cup is inserted into the vagina. Instead of absorbing blood, the cup catches it before it flows out of the vagina. Menstrual cups are made of flexible materials, like rubber or silicone.

You can't see when the cup is full, so empty it (or, in the case of disposable cups, throw it away) several times a day. Instructions that come with the cup explain how to do this.

Because some menstrual cups look like a diaphragm, girls might wonder if a menstrual cup could be used as birth control. But a menstrual cup does not prevent pregnancy.

How Do I Decide What to Use?
Choosing a type of period protection is up to you. Some girls like tampons because they're easy to store in a purse or pocket. Tampons and cups are also helpful for girls who do sports like swimming, since you can't wear a pad in the water.

Some girls prefer pads because they're easy to use and it's easier to remember when to change them because you can see them getting soaked with blood. And some girls with heavy periods use tampons together with pads or pantiliners for added protection against leaking.

Many girls switch back and forth depending on:

their situation
where they're going to be
their menstrual flow
time of day (day or night coverage)

Lots of girls and guys worry about when their bodies will develop. Guys wonder when their voices will get deeper, when they'll need to shave, or when their penises will grow. Girls want to know when their breasts will develop or when they'll get their first period. If a friend or a younger brother or sister develops first, they may worry that there's something wrong with them.

Different Variations of Normal
The fact is that physical development starts at different times and progresses at different rates in different people. So, the beginning of the development that comes with puberty varies from person to person — and that's completely normal.

The earliest physical change of puberty for girls is usually breast development, which most often begins around 10 or 11 years. But it's perfectly normal for breast development to start anytime between the ages of 7 and 13. A girl's first menstrual period usually happens about 2 to 2½ years after breast development begins.

Boys begin their development on average around age 10 or 11, but it's also normal to begin anytime between the ages of 9 and 15. Girls and guys who start developing earlier or later than these ranges can still be normal, but they should be checked by their doctor just to be sure.

For both boys and girls, it usually takes several years after the first changes of puberty begin before they're all complete — and there's a lot of variation from person to person. So, two normally developing guys or girls who are the same age can appear quite different from each other. One can look older and more physically mature than the other. But the one who started later will catch up in time.

Can I Do Anything to Speed Up Development?
You can't do anything to make your body develop faster. Of course, you should eat a nutritious diet, exercise, and get enough sleep. But special diets, dietary supplements, or creams won't do anything to make normal puberty happen quicker.

If you're a girl who's 13 or older or a boy who's 15 or older and you haven't shown any signs of puberty (or if you're younger but are still worried), talk with your doctor.
Why are my breasts different sizes? Is there anything I can do about it?
It is normal to have different sized breasts. If you have just started developing breasts, one breast may grow more quickly than the other. This difference in breast size may even out. But it's also perfectly normal for breasts to be different sizes even when they're fully developed.

If the size difference between your breasts bothers you, you can wear an extra-supportive bra or put a special insert in your bra (on the side where the breast is smaller). This will make your breasts look more equal in size. A bra salesperson can help with ideas for evening things out. Don't be embarrassed — rest assured, they've helped others with the same concern!

If you're still uncomfortable about your breast size, talk to your doctor or gynecologist. They can reassure you that your breasts are normal and talk to you about your options.

The only way to permanently change the shape of the breasts is through plastic surgery. Most doctors recommend that young women wait until their breasts are done growing (about age 20) before considering plastic surgery

Why Are My Breasts Sore?
en español: ¿Por qué me duelen los pechos?
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
Like most parts of the body, breasts can be sore from time to time for a number of reasons. Breast pain is common but rarely serious.

Here are some possible causes and tips for how to feel better.

What Can Cause Breast Soreness?
Puberty
Breasts start to get bigger around the time puberty begins and often feel sore. Most females start puberty when they're 8–13 years old, and they typically start getting breasts around age 10 or 11.

At first you might notice a small button-like lump beneath the nipple area. This is called the breast bud, and it’s normal for it to be a little tender.

Sometimes males develop breast during puberty, called gynecomastia. It usually goes away on its own.

Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS)
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a group of mood and body changes before or during your period. One common change is sore breasts.

The levels of some hormones change during PMS. This can cause the body to hold in water, making it puffy and bloated. The extra fluid makes breasts bigger. It also stretches the nerves, so breasts may feel achy or tender. Sometimes it can seem like your breasts gained weight overnight.

Pregnancy
Breast swelling and tenderness can be an early sign of pregnancy, along with a missed period. Talk with a parent and your doctor right away if you think you might be pregnant.

What Can I Do to Relieve Sore Breasts?
If your breasts are sore because of PMS, know that symptoms should go away by the time your period ends. Here are some other tips that may help you feel better:

Take a pain reliever like acetaminophen or ibuprofen.
Wear a supportive bra that fits well.
Exercise regularly.
Eat healthy foods. You can try cutting down on foods and drinks that can have a lot of caffeine (like coffee, tea, soda, and chocolate) or salt. Eating a diet rich in calcium might help ease tender breasts and other PMS symptoms.
Get enough sleep. Teens need about 8–10 hours of sleep each night.
Distract yourself. Sometimes getting your mind off your aches is the best thing you can do. Snuggle on the couch with your pillow and watch a good movie.
What Else Should I Know?
See your doctor if you have breast pain that’s sharper or lasts longer than usual, or that otherwise concerns you. Also call if you notice discharge from one or both breasts.

Your doctor can do a breast exam, where they press lightly on different parts of your breasts. It’s quick and may help them figure out what’s going on.

Why Is My Voice Changing?
en español: ¿Por qué está cambiando mi voz?
Medically reviewed by: Melanie L. Pitone, MD
Listen
Print
A changing voice is one of the many developments that happen to both girls and guys when they reach  puberty. Learn more about what happens when someone’s voice is changing.

What Causes My Voice to Change?
At puberty, guys' bodies begin producing a lot of the hormone testosterone (pronounced: tes-TOSS-tuh-rone), which causes changes in several parts of the body, including the voice. For starters, a guy's larynx (pronounced: LAIR-inks), also known as the voice box, grows bigger.

The larynx, which is located in the throat at the top of the trachea (pronounced: TRAY-kee-uh) or windpipe, is like a hollow tube about 2 inches (5 centimeters) high. The larynx is responsible for creating the sound of your voice.

Stretched across your larynx are two muscles, your vocal cords, which are kind of like rubber bands. When you breathe, your vocal cords relax against the walls of the larynx and completely open to allow air to get in and out of your lungs. When you speak, though, your vocal cords close together by stretching across the larynx. Air from your lungs is then forced out between your vocal cords, causing them to vibrate and produce the tone of your voice.

When you lower your voice, your vocal cords are relaxed and more floppy. When you make your voice higher, your vocal cords tighten. (You can notice this difference in how they feel as you adjust your speech.)

As your larynx grows, your vocal cords grow longer and thicker. Also, your facial bones begin to grow. Cavities in the sinuses, the nose, and the back of the throat grow bigger, creating more space in the face that gives your voice more room to echo. All of these factors cause your voice to get deeper.

Think of a guitar. When a thin string is plucked, it vibrates and produces a high-sounding tone. When a thicker string is plucked, it sounds much deeper when it vibrates. That's kind of what happens to your voice. Before your growth spurt, your larynx is relatively small and your vocal cords are relatively thin. So your voice is high and kid-like. But as bones, cartilage, and vocal cords grow, your voice starts to sound like an adult's.

Along with all the other changes in your body, you might notice that your throat area looks a little different. For guys, when the larynx grows bigger, it tilts to a different angle and you can see a bump in the front of the throat called the Adam's apple. For girls, the larynx also grows bigger but not as much as a guy's. That's why girls don't have Adam's apples.

Why Is My Voice So Hard to Control?
While your body is getting used to these changes, your voice can be difficult to control. A guy's voice "cracks" or "breaks" because his body is getting used to the changing size of his larynx. Fortunately, the cracking and breaking is only temporary. It usually lasts no longer than a few months. And even during that time, your voice won't crack every time you speak.

Some guys' voices might drop gradually, whereas others' might drop quickly. You may feel concerned, stressed, or embarrassed about the sound of your voice, but people usually understand — especially friends or brothers who've gone through it, too. Everyone goes through it, and once it happens, it takes a while to adjust to your larger larynx and the new sound of your voice.

When Will My Voice Change?
You may have noticed that some of your friends have cracking and breaking voices, some might already have deep voices, and some still have the same voice they've always had. Everyone's timetable is different, so some voices might start to change earlier and some might start a little later.

Generally, a guy's voice will start to change somewhere between the ages of 11 and 15 — although it can be earlier or later for some. It all depends on when a guy goes through puberty, and some normal guys enter puberty earlier or later than others.

How Deep Will My Voice Get?
The larger a guy's larynx, the thicker the vocal cords, and the bigger the resonating area, the deeper his voice will be.

Once your larynx has grown, your voice will be more stable and easier to control. But even then your voice hasn't finished developing! Even after the change that happens in your teens, your voice continues to develop. Although the squeaking and cracking stage doesn't last long, most guys' voices don't fully mature until they're in their twenties.

our Changing Body: Answers for Boys With Autism
en español: Tu cuerpo está cambiando: Respuestas para chicos con autismo
Medically reviewed by: Anne M. Meduri, MD
Listen
Print
As you get older, your body changes. This is part of growing up. It's called puberty.

What Is Puberty?
Puberty is when a person's body changes as they go from being a kid to an adult. Boys become men. Girls become women. The changes of puberty happen slowly.

When things change, it can feel a little scary, but knowing what to expect can help you feel better. When you have questions, ask your mom, dad, doctor, or another trusted adult.

What Will Happen to My Body?
During puberty, your body goes through many changes. This is healthy and normal. 

First, the skin on your face will get oily and you may get pimples on your face. Your voice will sound lower. You will get taller.

Hair will grow on body parts other than your head. It will grow on your face, under your arms, on your chest, and in your private area (the part of your body covered by underwear.) Your arms and legs will get hairier. When you sweat, it will smell stinky, especially under your arms.

Your penis and testicles (balls) will get bigger. Sometimes your penis will get bigger and hard. This is called an erection.

Puberty: What Happens? Voice - Your voice deepens. Sweat- Your armpits sweat. Hair - Hair grows on your face, arms, legs, chest, armpits, and between your legs. Height - You get taller. Face - You may get pimples. Privates - Your penis and testicles get bigger.

Why Does My Penis Get Hard?
Sometimes erections just happen. Other times, they happen when you touch your penis or something rubs against it. It's called ejaculation when a sticky liquid called semen comes out of your penis.

When you ejaculate at night in your sleep, it is called a wet dream. Erections, ejaculation, and wet dreams are a normal part of puberty.

How Will I Feel?
Puberty might cause strong emotions, like feeling angry. You may have other feelings too:

You might feel happy one minute and sad the next.
You might think another person is cute, and like them a lot.
You might feel like touching yourself in a private area.
These feelings are normal and part of growing up.

What's Private?
Private means when you are alone. Your bedroom and the bathroom are private places. You also have private parts of your body, which are covered by your underwear. Some of the changes that come with puberty need to be taken care of in private.

What to Do in Private
It's OK to touch your private parts when you are alone in the bathroom or your bedroom with the door closed. Ejaculations and wet dreams happen in private. Do not touch your private parts when in public. Public places are where other people are around, like a classroom, restaurant, or playground.

Your mom or dad or doctor may need to check your private area to keep it clean and healthy. No one else should touch you or your private area, and you should never touch another person's private area. If anyone (even an adult) ever touches your private area in a way that makes you feel bad, say "No!" and tell your mom, dad, or other trusted adult.

When you are older and ready to have a girlfriend or boyfriend, talk to a parent, doctor, or other trusted adult to learn about sex and healthy relationships.

Your Changing Body: Answers for Girls With Autism
en español: Tu cuerpo está cambiando: Respuestas para chicas con autismo
Medically reviewed by: Anne M. Meduri, MD
Listen
Print
When you're a teen, your body changes — on the inside and the outside. This is part of growing up. It's called puberty.

What Is Puberty?
Puberty is when a person's body changes from a kid to an adult. Girls become women. Boys become men. The changes of puberty happen slowly.

When things change, it can feel a little scary. Knowing what to expect can help you feel better. When you have questions, ask your mom, dad, doctor, or another trusted adult.

How Will My Body Change on the Outside?
During puberty, you will get:

taller
oily skin and pimples
breasts. Just like people come in many shapes and sizes, so do breasts. There's no one right size for breasts.
hair on body parts other than your head. It will grow under your arms, on your legs, and your private area (the part covered by underwear).
sweat that smells stinky — especially under your arms
These changes are normal and healthy.

Puberty: What Happens? Height - You get taller. Breasts - Your breasts grow. Hair - Hair grows in your armpits, on your legs, and between your legs. Face - You may get pimples. Sweat - Your armpits sweat. Menstruation - Your period begins.

How Will My Body Change on the Inside?
It might not seem like it, but a lot is happening on the inside too. The biggest thing that happens is that you will get your period (called menstruation).

This is when blood comes out of your vagina, but you are not sick or hurt. When you get your period, you will see blood on your underwear, on toilet paper, or in the toilet bowl. Girls can wear a special pad in their underwear to catch the blood. Some girls wear period underwear. It’s just like regular underwear but has a built-in pad to catch the blood. Some girls use tampons. A tampon is put into the vagina to soak up the blood.

Periods usually happen once each month and last for 3 to 7 days.

When you have your period you may feel cranky, tired, or sad. Some girls get stomachaches. If your stomach hurts or you're not feeling well, always tell your mom, dad, or school nurse.

How Will I Feel?
Puberty might cause strong emotions, like feeling angry. You may have other feelings too:

You might feel happy one minute and sad the next.
You might think another person is cute, and like them a lot.
You might feel like touching yourself in your private area.
These feelings are normal and part of growing up.

What's Private?
Private means when you are alone. Your bedroom and the bathroom are private places. You also have private parts of your body, which are covered by your bra and underpants. Some of the changes that come with puberty need to be taken care of in private.

What to Do in Private
It's OK to touch your private parts when you are alone in the bathroom or your bedroom with the door closed. Do not touch your private parts when in public. Public places are where other people are around, like a classroom, restaurant, or playground.

Your mom or dad or doctor may need to check your private area to keep it clean and healthy. No one else should touch your private area, and you should never touch another person's private area. If anyone (even an adult) ever touches you or your private area in a way that makes you feel bad, say "No!" and tell your mom, dad, or other trusted adult.

When you are older and ready to have a boyfriend or girlfriend, talk to a parent, doctor, or other trusted adult to learn about sex and healthy relationships.

Changing your pad. When you get your period, you will need to wear a pad or tampon to catch the blood. You have to change your pad before it smells or is full of blood. Changing your pad is also something you do in private. Your mom, dad, or another trusted adult can teach you how to use pads or tampons.

BIRTH CONTROL

Abstinence
en español: Abstinencia sexual
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Abstinence?
Abstinence is choosing not to have sex. 

How Does Abstinence Work?
Abstinence (AB-stih-nints) is the most effective form of birth control. If two people don't have sex, sperm can't fertilize an egg and there's no possibility of pregnancy. Other forms of birth control:

depend on barriers that prevent the sperm from reaching the egg (such as condoms or diaphragms)
interfere with the menstrual cycle (as birth control pills do)
With abstinence, no barriers or pills are needed.

Even people who have previously had sex can and do practice abstinence. A person who has been having sex can still choose abstinence to prevent pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) in the future.

How Well Does Abstinence Work?
Abstinence is the only form of birth control that always prevents pregnancy. Practicing abstinence ensures that a girl will not become pregnant because there is no chance for sperm to fertilize an egg.

Many other birth control methods have high rates of success if used properly, but they can fail occasionally.

Does Abstinence Help Prevent STDs?
Abstinence protects people against STDs from vaginal sex. But STDs can also spread through oral-genital sex, anal sex, or even intimate skin-to-skin contact (for example, genital warts and herpes can spread this way).

Complete abstinence is the only way to guarantee protection against STDs. This means avoiding all types of intimate genital contact. Someone practicing complete abstinence does not have any type of intimate sexual contact, including oral sex. So there is no risk of getting an STD.

Abstinence does not prevent HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C infections that can spread through nonsexual activities, like using contaminated needles for tattooing or injecting drugs or steroids.

Who Practices Abstinence?
Peer pressure and other things sometimes can make it hard for someone to decide to practice abstinence. But the truth is, many teens don't have sex. Abstinence also can give someone time to think about and grow an emotional connection. Having sex can change a relationship, and it's completely normal to not feel ready for that or the complicated feelings it can bring.

So don't let teasing or pressure from friends, a girlfriend, or a boyfriend push you into something that's not right for you.

Choosing abstinence is an important decision — and yours to make.

What Else Should I Know?
If you have questions about making this choice or about other birth control methods, talk to a trusted adult. If you feel you can't talk to a parent, reach out to a teacher, a counselor, a doctor, or a school nurse who can provide answers

Birth Control (Contraceptive) Pill
en español: Píldora anticonceptiva
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
What Is It?Birth Control Pill
The birth control pill (also called "the Pill") is a daily pill that contains hormones to change the way the body works and prevent pregnancy. Hormones are chemical substances that control the functioning of the body's organs. In this case, the hormones in the Pill control the ovaries and the uterus.

How Does It Work?
Most birth control pills are "combination pills" containing a mix of the hormones estrogen and progesterone to prevent ovulation (the release of an egg during the monthly menstrual cycle). Pregnancy can't happen if a female doesn't ovulate because there is no egg to be fertilized.

The Pill also works by thickening the mucus around the cervix, which makes it difficult for sperm to enter the uterus and reach any eggs that may have been released. The hormones in the Pill can also sometimes affect the lining of the uterus, making it difficult for an egg to attach to the wall of the uterus.

How Is the Pill Taken?
Most combination pills come in either a 21-day pack or a 28-day pack. One hormone pill is taken each day at about the same time for 21 days. Depending on your pack, you will either stop taking birth control pills for 7 days (as in the 21-day pack) or you will take a pill that contains no hormones for 7 days (the 28-day pack). You'll get your period when you stop taking the pills that contain hormones. Some people prefer the 28-day pack because it helps them stay in the habit of taking a pill every day.

Also available is a combination pill that makes periods happen less often by supplying a hormone pill for 12 weeks and then inactive pills for 7 days. This reduces the number of periods to 1 every 3 months instead of 1 every month.

Another kind of pill that may change the number of monthly periods is the low-dose progesterone pill, sometimes called the mini-pill. This type of birth control pill differs from the other pills in that it only contains one type of hormone — progesterone — rather than a combination of estrogen and progesterone. It works by changing the cervical mucus and the lining of the uterus, and sometimes by affecting ovulation as well. The mini-pill may be slightly less effective at preventing pregnancy than combination pills.

The mini-pill is taken every day without a break. Someone who takes the mini-pill may have no period at all or may have irregular periods. For the mini-pill to work, it must be taken at the same time every day, without missing any doses.

Any type of birth control pill works best when it is taken every single day at the same time of day, regardless of whether you're going to have sex. This is especially important with progesterone-only pills.

For the first 7 days after someone starts taking the Pill, they should use a second form of contraception, such as condoms, to prevent pregnancy. After 7 days, the Pill should work alone to prevent pregnancy. This timing can vary based on the type of Pill and when you start taking it — so be sure to talk about it with your doctor. Also, it's important to continue using condoms to protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs).

If you skip or forget pills, you're not protected against pregnancy and will need a backup form of birth control, such as condoms. Or you'll need to stop having sex for a while. Do not take a friend's or relative's pills.

How Well Does It Work?
Over the course of 1 year, about 9 out of 100 typical couples who rely on the Pill to prevent pregnancy will have an accidental pregnancy. Of course, this is an average figure and the chance of getting pregnant depends on whether you take your birth control pills every day. The Pill is an effective form of birth control, but even missing 1 day increases the chance of getting pregnant.

In general, how well each type of birth control method works depends on a lot of things. These include whether a person has any health conditions or is taking any medicines or herbal supplements that might interfere with its use (for example, a medicine like antibiotics can affect how well the Pill works). Talk to your doctor to check if anything you take could affect how the Pill works for you.

How well a particular method of birth control works also depends on whether the method chosen is convenient — and whether the person remembers to use it correctly all the time.

Protection Against STDs
The birth control pill does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex (or any intimate sexual contact) must always use condoms along with the Pill to protect against STDs.

Abstinence (the decision to not have sex or any intimate sexual contact) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Possible Side Effects
The birth control pill is a safe and effective method of birth control. Most people who take the Pill have no or very few side effects. If side effects do happen, they can include:

irregular menstrual bleeding (more common with the mini-pill)
nausea, headaches, dizziness, and breast tenderness
mood changes
blood clots (rare in those under 35 who do not smoke)
Some of these side effects improve over the first 3 months on the Pill. When side effects are bothersome or don't get better, a doctor may prescribe a different brand of the Pill.

The Pill also has some side effects that many users enjoy. It usually makes periods lighter, reduces cramps, and is often prescribed for women who have menstrual problems. Taking the combination Pill often improves acne, and some doctors prescribe it for this purpose. Combination birth control pills have also been found to protect against some forms of breast disease, anemia, ovarian cysts, and ovarian and endometrial cancers.

Who Uses It?
Someone who can remember to take a pill each day and who wants excellent protection from pregnancy can use birth control pills.

In some cases, medical or other conditions make the use of the Pill less effective or more risky. For example, it is not recommended for those who have had blood clots, liver problems, or some migraine headaches. Those who have had unexplained vaginal bleeding (bleeding that is not during their periods) or who think they may be pregnant should talk to their doctor.

How Do You Get It?
A doctor or a nurse practitioner (NP) must prescribe the Pill. They'll ask about a girl's health and family medical history, and will do an exam, which may include a pelvic exam. If the doctor or NP prescribes birth control pills, they'll explain when to begin taking the Pill and what to do if pills are missed.

The doctor or NP might want to do a blood pressure check a few months later and make sure there are no other problems. After that, girls who are having sex should get routine exams every 6 months to a year, or as recommended.

How Much Does It Cost?
The Pill usually costs between $0 and $50 a month, depending on the type. Many health and family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) sell birth control pills for less. In addition, birth control pills and doctor visits are covered by many health insurance plans.

Birth Control Methods: How Well Do They Work?
en español: Métodos anticonceptivos: ¿Cuál es su grado de eficacia?
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
Some Birth Control Methods Work Better Than Others
Some birth control methods work better than others. This chart compares how well different methods work to prevent pregnancy.

The most effective way to prevent pregnancy is abstinence. However, within the first year of committing to abstinence, many couples become pregnant because they have sex anyway but don't use protection. So it's a good idea even for people who don't plan to have sex to learn about birth control.

Couples who do have sex need to use birth control properly and consistently to prevent pregnancy. For example, the birth control pill can be effective in preventing pregnancy. But if pills are skipped, it isn't an effective method. Condoms can be an effective form of birth control too. But forgetting to use one or not using one correctly is not an effective way to prevent pregnancy.

Birth Control Methods Chart & Ratings
For every 100 couples using each type of birth control, the chart shows how many of these couples will get pregnant within a year. The information shown is for all couples, not just teenage couples. Some birth control methods may be less effective for teen users. For example, teens who use fertility awareness (also called the rhythm method) may have an even greater chance of getting pregnant than adults because their bodies have not yet settled into a regular menstrual cycle.

We list the effectiveness of different birth control methods based on their typical use rates. Typical use refers to how the average person uses that method of birth control (compared with "perfect" use, which means no mistakes are made in using that method).

Here are the ratings and what they mean:

completely effective: no couples will become pregnant while using that method
very effective: 1–2 out of 100 couples become pregnant while using that method
effective: 2–12 out of 100 couples become pregnant while using that method
moderately effective: 13–20 out of 100 couples become pregnant while using that method
less effective: 21–40 out of 100 couples become pregnant while using that method
not effective: more than 40 out of 100 couples become pregnant while using that method
Besides preventing pregnancy, abstinence and condoms provide some protection against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Most other birth control methods do not provide much protection against STDs, so condoms should also be used.

Birth Control Methods: Comparison Chart
 
Birth Control Method	Couples Using This Method Who Get Pregnant in a Year	How Well It Works to Prevent Pregnancy	Protection Against STDs?
Abstinence	None	Completely effective	Yes
Birth Control Implant	Fewer than 1 out of 100	Very effective	No
IUD	Fewer than 1 out of 100	Very effective	No
Birth Control Patch ("The Patch")	9 out of 100	Effective	No
Birth Control Pill ("The Pill")	9 out of 100	Effective	No
Birth Control Ring ("The Ring")	9 out of 100	Effective	No
Birth Control Shot	6 out of 100	Effective	No
Emergency Contraception 
(Morning After Pill)	up to 11 out of 100 (if taken within 72 hours after unprotected sex)	Effective	No
Male Condom	18 out of 100	Moderately effective	Yes
Diaphragm	12 out of 100	Moderately effective	No
Female Condom	21 out of 100	Less effective	Yes
Fertility Awareness	24 out of 100	Less effective	No
Spermicide	29 out of 100	Less effective	No
Withdrawal ("Pulling Out")	27 out of 100	Less effective	No
Sex Without Birth Control	85 out of 100	Not effective	No
Choosing a birth control method based on how well it works is important. But also think about:

how easy the birth control method is to use
how much it costs
whether you have a health condition or take medicine that could affect how well a particular birth control method works What Is the Birth Control Patch?

The birth control patch is a thin, beige, 1¾-inch (4½-centimeter) square patch that sticks to the skin. It releases hormones through the skin into the bloodstream to prevent pregnancy. Hormones are chemical substances that control the functioning of the body's organs.

How Does the Birth Control Patch Work?
The combination of the hormones progesterone and estrogen in the patch prevents ovulation (the release of an egg from the ovaries during the monthly menstrual cycle). If an egg isn't released, a female can't get pregnant because there's nothing for sperm to fertilize.

The hormones in the patch also thicken the mucus produced in the cervix, making it difficult for sperm to enter and reach any eggs that may have been released. The hormones can also sometimes affect the lining of the uterus so that if the egg is fertilized it will have a hard time attaching to the wall of the uterus.

Like other birth control methods that use hormones, such as the birth control pill or birth control ring, using the birth control patch is based on a female's monthly menstrual cycle. She puts on the patch on the first day of her menstrual cycle or the first Sunday after her menstrual cycle begins. She will change the patch on her skin once a week for 3 weeks in a row. (The patch should be applied to one of these four areas: the abdomen, buttocks, upper outer arm, or upper torso — except for the breasts.) On the fourth week, no patch is worn, and her period should start during this time.

Using the Patch
It's important to apply a new patch on the same day every week to make sure that it keeps working effectively. For example, someone who applies their first patch on a Monday should always apply the patches on a Monday.

When it's time to change the patch, pull the old one off first, before applying a new patch. Place the new patch on a different area from the old patch (but still on one of the four recommended areas) to avoid skin irritation. Don't apply the patch to skin that is red, irritated, or cut.

For the first 7 days on the patch, use an additional form of contraception as well to prevent pregnancy.

If you forget to apply a new patch on the right day, or if the patch becomes loose and falls off, read the instructions that come in the package or call your doctor. If this happens, you might need to use a backup method of birth control (such as condoms) or stop having sex for a while to protect against pregnancy. Also, if you stop using the patch for any reason, you will need to begin using another birth control method, usually after 24 hours of removing your last patch.

It's OK to do regular activities like swimming and exercise while wearing the patch. It can also get wet in the shower or in the bath. Do not remove the patch until the week is over (pulling the patch off to reposition or move it may cause it to lose some of its stickiness and it might fall off easily). If the patch does not stick well, apply a replacement patch. Don't try to decorate the patch, change the size of a patch by trimming it, or try to attach it with tape. Talk to your doctor if the patch falls off.

The patch should not be applied over makeup, creams, lotions, powder, or other skin products as these may prevent it from sticking well. (Skin products may also affect how hormones are absorbed by the skin.) 

When you remove the patch, fold it in half with the sticky sides facing each other (to prevent the chemicals from getting into other items in the trash and going to the soil) and throw it away (don't flush it down the toilet).

How Well Does the Birth Control Patch Work?
Ongoing studies suggest the birth control patch is as effective as the birth control pill. That means that about 9 out of 100 couples will have an unintended pregnancy during the first year of use. Of course, the chance of getting pregnant depends on whether you use the patch correctly. Delaying or missing a weekly application or removing a patch too early lowers its effectiveness and increases the chance of pregnancy.

For girls who weigh more than 198 pounds (90 kilograms), the contraceptive patch may be less effective in preventing pregnancy.

In general, how well each type of birth control method works depends on a lot of things. These include whether a person has any health conditions or is taking any medicines that might interfere with the patch. How effective the patch is at preventing pregnancy also depends on whether the method chosen is convenient — and whether the person remembers to use it correctly all the time.

Does the Birth Control Patch Help Prevent STDs?
The birth control patch does not protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Couples having sex must always use condoms along with the birth control patch to protect against STDs.

Abstinence (the decision to not have sex or any genital intimacy) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Are There Any Problems With the Birth Control Patch?
The birth control patch is a safe and effective method of birth control. Most people who use the patch have no side effects. Smoking cigarettes while using the patch can increase the risk of certain side effects, which is why health professionals advise those who use the patch not to smoke.

Side effects that can happen with the patch are similar to those with the birth control pill. These may include:

irregular menstrual bleeding
nausea, headaches, dizziness, and breast tenderness
mood changes
blood clots (rare in those under 35 who do not smoke, but there may be a higher risk with the patch than with the Pill)
Other possible side effects seen in patch users include:

skin reactions at the site of application of the patch
problems with contact lens use — a change in vision or inability to wear the lenses
menstrual cramps
Many of these side effects are mild and tend to disappear after 2 or 3 months.

Who Is the Birth Control Patch Right for?
The birth control patch may be a good choice for someone who's sexually active, weighs less than 198 pounds (90 kilograms), and finds it hard to remember to take a pill every day or who has trouble swallowing pills.

In some cases, medical or other conditions make the use of the patch less effective or more risky. For example, it's not recommended for someone who has had blood clots, severe high blood pressure, some cancers, certain types of migraine headaches, or diabetes with certain problems. Anyone with unexplained vaginal bleeding (bleeding that's not during their periods) or who think they may be pregnant should talk to their doctors, discontinue using the patch, and use another form of birth control in the meantime.

Where Is the Birth Control Patch Available?
A doctor or a nurse practitioner (NP) must prescribe the patch. They'll ask questions about your health and family medical history, and may also do an exam, including a blood pressure check and possibly a pelvic exam. If recommending the patch, the doctor or NP will write a prescription and give you instructions on how to use it.

Those who start using the patch may be asked to return within a few months for a blood pressure measurement and to make sure that there are no problems. After that, a doctor may recommend routine exams once or twice a year or as needed.

How Much Does the Birth Control Patch Cost?
The cost of the patch can range from free to around $85 a month. Check your health insurance plan and what programs are available (such as Planned Parenthood) to get the best price. What Is the Birth Control Patch?

The birth control patch is a thin, beige, 1¾-inch (4½-centimeter) square patch that sticks to the skin. It releases hormones through the skin into the bloodstream to prevent pregnancy. Hormones are chemical substances that control the functioning of the body's organs.

How Does the Birth Control Patch Work?
The combination of the hormones progesterone and estrogen in the patch prevents ovulation (the release of an egg from the ovaries during the monthly menstrual cycle). If an egg isn't released, a female can't get pregnant because there's nothing for sperm to fertilize.

The hormones in the patch also thicken the mucus produced in the cervix, making it difficult for sperm to enter and reach any eggs that may have been released. The hormones can also sometimes affect the lining of the uterus so that if the egg is fertilized it will have a hard time attaching to the wall of the uterus.

Like other birth control methods that use hormones, such as the birth control pill or birth control ring, using the birth control patch is based on a female's monthly menstrual cycle. She puts on the patch on the first day of her menstrual cycle or the first Sunday after her menstrual cycle begins. She will change the patch on her skin once a week for 3 weeks in a row. (The patch should be applied to one of these four areas: the abdomen, buttocks, upper outer arm, or upper torso — except for the breasts.) On the fourth week, no patch is worn, and her period should start during this time.

Using the Patch
It's important to apply a new patch on the same day every week to make sure that it keeps working effectively. For example, someone who applies their first patch on a Monday should always apply the patches on a Monday.

When it's time to change the patch, pull the old one off first, before applying a new patch. Place the new patch on a different area from the old patch (but still on one of the four recommended areas) to avoid skin irritation. Don't apply the patch to skin that is red, irritated, or cut.

For the first 7 days on the patch, use an additional form of contraception as well to prevent pregnancy.

If you forget to apply a new patch on the right day, or if the patch becomes loose and falls off, read the instructions that come in the package or call your doctor. If this happens, you might need to use a backup method of birth control (such as condoms) or stop having sex for a while to protect against pregnancy. Also, if you stop using the patch for any reason, you will need to begin using another birth control method, usually after 24 hours of removing your last patch.

It's OK to do regular activities like swimming and exercise while wearing the patch. It can also get wet in the shower or in the bath. Do not remove the patch until the week is over (pulling the patch off to reposition or move it may cause it to lose some of its stickiness and it might fall off easily). If the patch does not stick well, apply a replacement patch. Don't try to decorate the patch, change the size of a patch by trimming it, or try to attach it with tape. Talk to your doctor if the patch falls off.

The patch should not be applied over makeup, creams, lotions, powder, or other skin products as these may prevent it from sticking well. (Skin products may also affect how hormones are absorbed by the skin.) 

When you remove the patch, fold it in half with the sticky sides facing each other (to prevent the chemicals from getting into other items in the trash and going to the soil) and throw it away (don't flush it down the toilet).

How Well Does the Birth Control Patch Work?
Ongoing studies suggest the birth control patch is as effective as the birth control pill. That means that about 9 out of 100 couples will have an unintended pregnancy during the first year of use. Of course, the chance of getting pregnant depends on whether you use the patch correctly. Delaying or missing a weekly application or removing a patch too early lowers its effectiveness and increases the chance of pregnancy.

For girls who weigh more than 198 pounds (90 kilograms), the contraceptive patch may be less effective in preventing pregnancy.

In general, how well each type of birth control method works depends on a lot of things. These include whether a person has any health conditions or is taking any medicines that might interfere with the patch. How effective the patch is at preventing pregnancy also depends on whether the method chosen is convenient — and whether the person remembers to use it correctly all the time.

Does the Birth Control Patch Help Prevent STDs?
The birth control patch does not protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Couples having sex must always use condoms along with the birth control patch to protect against STDs.

Abstinence (the decision to not have sex or any genital intimacy) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Are There Any Problems With the Birth Control Patch?
The birth control patch is a safe and effective method of birth control. Most people who use the patch have no side effects. Smoking cigarettes while using the patch can increase the risk of certain side effects, which is why health professionals advise those who use the patch not to smoke.

Side effects that can happen with the patch are similar to those with the birth control pill. These may include:

irregular menstrual bleeding
nausea, headaches, dizziness, and breast tenderness
mood changes
blood clots (rare in those under 35 who do not smoke, but there may be a higher risk with the patch than with the Pill)
Other possible side effects seen in patch users include:

skin reactions at the site of application of the patch
problems with contact lens use — a change in vision or inability to wear the lenses
menstrual cramps
Many of these side effects are mild and tend to disappear after 2 or 3 months.

Who Is the Birth Control Patch Right for?
The birth control patch may be a good choice for someone who's sexually active, weighs less than 198 pounds (90 kilograms), and finds it hard to remember to take a pill every day or who has trouble swallowing pills.

In some cases, medical or other conditions make the use of the patch less effective or more risky. For example, it's not recommended for someone who has had blood clots, severe high blood pressure, some cancers, certain types of migraine headaches, or diabetes with certain problems. Anyone with unexplained vaginal bleeding (bleeding that's not during their periods) or who think they may be pregnant should talk to their doctors, discontinue using the patch, and use another form of birth control in the meantime.

Where Is the Birth Control Patch Available?
A doctor or a nurse practitioner (NP) must prescribe the patch. They'll ask questions about your health and family medical history, and may also do an exam, including a blood pressure check and possibly a pelvic exam. If recommending the patch, the doctor or NP will write a prescription and give you instructions on how to use it.

Those who start using the patch may be asked to return within a few months for a blood pressure measurement and to make sure that there are no problems. After that, a doctor may recommend routine exams once or twice a year or as needed.

How Much Does the Birth Control Patch Cost?
The cost of the patch can range from free to around $85 a month. Check your health insurance plan and what programs are available (such as Planned Parenthood) to get the best price.

What Is the Birth Control Shot?Birth Control Shot
The birth control shot is an injection given to a girl every 3 months to help prevent pregnancy. The birth control shot contains a longer acting form of the hormone progestin.

How Does the Birth Control Shot Work?
The hormone progestin in the birth control shot works by preventing ovulation (the release of an egg during the monthly menstrual cycle). If an egg isn't released, pregnancy can't happen because there's no egg for the sperm to fertilize.

The progestin also thickens the mucus around the cervix. This makes it hard for sperm to enter the uterus and reach any eggs that may have been released. The progestin also thins the lining of the uterus so that an egg will have a hard time attaching to the wall of the uterus.

How Well Does the Birth Control Shot Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
The birth control shot is an effective birth control method. Over the course of a year, about 6 out of 100 typical couples who use the birth control shot will have an accidental pregnancy. The chance of getting pregnant increases if a girl waits longer than 3 months to get her next shot.

In general, how well each type of birth control method works depends on a lot of things. These include whether a person has any health conditions or is taking any medicines that might affect its use. It also depends on whether the method is convenient and whether the person remembers to use it correctly all of the time.

Does the Birth Control Shot Help Prevent STDs?
No. The birth control shot does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms along with the shot to protect against STDs.

Are There Any Side Effects With the Birth Control Shot?
The birth control shot often causes period changes. Side effects can include:

irregular periods or no menstrual periods
weight gain, headaches, and breast tenderness
depression
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a safety warning about the use of the birth control shot. Studies link this shot to a loss of bone density, although bone density may recover when someone stops getting the shot. The loss of bone density seems to be worse when the shot is used for longer periods of time.

Doctors are not sure how this type of shot may affect the bone density of young people in the future, though. Anyone considering the shot should talk to their doctors about it and make sure that they get enough calcium each day. Those who smoke should be sure to let their doctors know because smoking may be connected to this bone density loss.

Some people receiving shots may notice their periods are irregular for up to a year after stopping the shot. But the shot does not cause permanent loss of fertility and most users can get pregnant after they stop getting the shot.

Who Can Use the Birth Control Shot?
Anyone who has trouble remembering to take birth control pills and who wants extremely good protection against pregnancy may want to use the birth control shot. Also, nursing mothers can use the birth control shot.

Some medical conditions make the use of the shot less effective or riskier. For example, it is not recommended anyone who has had blood clots, some types of cancers, or liver disease. Those who have had unexplained vaginal bleeding (bleeding that is not during their periods) or who might be pregnant should not get the birth control shot and should talk to their doctors.
Where Is the Birth Control Shot Available?
The shot must be prescribed and is given every 3 months in a doctor's office or family planning clinic.

How Much Does the Birth Control Shot Cost?
Each injection (3 months' worth of birth control) costs between $0 and about $150. Many health insurance plans cover the cost of birth control shots, as well as the cost of the doctor's visit. Family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) may charge less.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
If you use the birth control shot, call your doctor if you:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of your vaginal discharge
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex
have heavy or long-lasting vaginal bleeding
have yellowing of the skin or eyes
have severe headaches
feels depressed
have signs of a blood clot, such as lower leg pain, chest pain, trouble breathing, weakness, tingling, trouble speaking, or vision problems

Birth Control: What to Know
en español: Anticonceptivos: Qué debes saber
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
If you decide to have sex, it’s important to know about birth control so you can protect against unplanned pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). STDs are infections that can spread can through vaginal, oral, or anal sex; by using fingers; or with other sexual contact. The only method that fully prevents pregnancy and STDs is abstinence (not having sex).

To help protect against STDs, use a barrier method, like a condom, each time you have sex. To help prevent pregnancy, use a reliable method of birth control along with condoms. There are many types of birth control. A parent, doctor, or other trusted adult can give you advice on what may work best for you.

Can Vaginal Cleaning Prevent Pregnancy?
en español: ¿La limpieza vaginal permite evitar el embarazo?
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
You might have heard that vaginal cleaning after sex — using things like vinegar, steam, vaginal cleansers, yogurt, or probiotics (supplements that have “good” germs) — can prevent pregnancy. But this doesn’t work.

The fact is that sperm swim very fast and many reach the uterus before someone even starts to wash. Cleaning the vagina (sometimes called douching) can even push sperm into the uterus. It can also cause a pelvic infection.

Should I Use Birth Control Instead?
To avoid getting pregnant, use reliable birth control. Some methods are better at preventing pregnancy than others. For example, birth control pills and intrauterine devices (IUDs) are very good when used the right way.

What Else Should I Know?
You should also use condoms during sex to avoid sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Condoms alone can help prevent pregnancy too, but they don’t work as well as other types of birth control.

Keep in mind that STDs can also spread through anal or oral sex, by using fingers, or through other types of sexual contact. So use protection like finger condoms and dental dams as well. The only way to fully prevent STDs and pregnancy is to not have sex.

Talk with your doctor or go to a health clinic (like Planned Parenthood) to learn more about what birth control choices are best for you.

What Are Condoms?
Condoms are thin pouches that keep sperm from getting into the vagina. There are male condoms and female condoms:

Birth Control, Male Condom

A male condom is worn on the penis. It is usually made of latex, a type of rubber. But some are made of materials that are safe for people with latex allergies, such as polyurethane or polyisoprene.
A female condom is inserted into the vagina. It has a flexible ring at either end. One end is closed and goes into the vagina; the other end is open and the ring sits outside the opening of the vagina. Female condoms are made from materials safe for people with latex allergies.
How Do Condoms Work?
Condoms work by keeping semen (the fluid that contains sperm) from entering the vagina. The male condom is placed on the penis when it becomes erect. It is unrolled all the way to the base of the penis while holding the tip of the condom to leave some extra room at the end. This creates a space for semen after ejaculation and makes it less likely that the condom will break.

Birth Control, Female Condom

After the male ejaculates, he should hold the condom at the base of the penis as he pulls out of the vagina. He must do this while the penis is still erect. This prevents the condom from slipping off when he gets soft, which could let sperm enter the vagina.

The female condom is inserted into the vagina using the closed-end ring. The other ring creates the open end of the condom. The condom then lines the walls of the vagina, creating a barrier between the sperm and the cervix. The female condom can be inserted up to 8 hours before intercourse. It should be removed immediately after sex and before standing up.

The male and female condoms should not be used at the same time because friction can break them, make them stick together, or make one or the other slip out of place during intercourse. If a condom breaks or slips, semen can get through, making the condom less likely to prevent pregnancy or STDs.

How Well Do Condoms Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
Over the course of a year:

15 out of 100 typical couples who use male condoms will have an accidental pregnancy.
About 21 out of 100 couples who use female condoms will have an accidental pregnancy.
For added protection, it's wise to use condoms along with another method of birth control, like birth control pills or an IUD. For condoms to have their best chance of working, they must be used every time a couple has sex.


A condom cannot be reused. A new condom should be used each time a couple has sex and it must be used from start to finish to protect against pregnancy and STDs. Never use oil-based lubricants (such as mineral oil, petroleum jelly, or baby oil) with condoms because they can break down the rubber. Condoms also can be damaged by things like fingernails and body piercings.

If a condom seems dry, sticky, or stiff when it comes out of the package, or is past its expiration date, throw it away and use a new one instead. It's helpful to have several condoms on hand in case there's a problem with one. It's best to store unused condoms in a cool, dry place.

Do Condoms Help Protect Against STDs?
Yes. Latex, polyurethane, and polyisoprene condoms can help prevent many STDs if they are used correctly. Condoms made of lambskin do not work well to prevent STDs, especially HIV/AIDs.

Condoms do not protect against infections spread from sores on the skin not covered by a condom (such as the base of the penis or scrotum). Couples having sex must always use condoms to protect against STDs even when using another method of birth control.

Abstinence (not having sex) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Are There Any Problems With Condoms?
Most people have no problems using condoms. Side effects that can sometimes happen include:

an allergic reaction in someone with an allergy to latex condoms
irritation of the penis or the vagina from spermicides or lubricants that some condoms are treated with
Who Are Condoms Right for?
Everyone should consider using a condom to help protect against STDs. Condoms may be a good option for preventing pregnancy for couples who are responsible enough to stop and put a condom on each time before sex.

Because condoms are the only method of birth control currently available for guys, they allow the male to take responsibility for birth control and STD protection.

Where Are Condoms Available?
Condoms are easy to find in drugstores, supermarkets, and even vending machines. (In some stores, they're in the "Family Planning" aisle.) Condoms do not require a doctor's visit or a prescription.

How Much Do Condoms Cost?
Male condoms cost about $0.50 to $1 each and are less expensive when they are bought in boxes that contain several condoms. Many health centers and family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) and some schools distribute them free of charge.

Female condoms are a little more expensive and cost about $2 per condom. Some health centers and family planning clinics have female condoms available for free.

What Are Finger Condoms?
Finger condoms (also called finger cots) are different. These thin pouches made of a stretchy material like latex are placed over a finger. They're often used to help prevent infection. They come rolled up like a male condom, then are placed on the tip of the finger and rolled down to the base. When using finger condoms for sex, be sure to use a new one for different parts of the body, like the vagina and anus. This helps prevent germs from spreading.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
A female using condoms should call the doctor if:

she might be pregnant
a condom broke during sex
there's a change in the smell or color of her vaginal discharge
she has unexplained fever or chills
she has belly or pelvic pain
she has pain during sex
A male using condoms should call doctor if: 

a condom broke during sex
there are lesions or bumps on his penis, or his penis hurts 
discharge is coming from the penis

Emergency Contraception
en español: Anticoncepción de emergencia
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Emergency Contraception?
Emergency contraception is a way to prevent pregnancy after unprotected sex. Often called the morning-after pill, emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs) are pills that can be taken up to 120 hours (5 days) after having unprotected sex. Some types of emergency contraception work best when taken within 72 hours (3 days) after intercourse.

The copper IUD can sometimes be used as a form of emergency contraception.

How Does Emergency Contraception Work?
Emergency contraceptive pills work by delaying ovulation (the release of an egg during the monthly cycle). If fertilization and implantation have already happened, ECPs will not interrupt the pregnancy.

How Well Does Emergency Contraception Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
About 1 or 2 in every 100 women who use ECPs will become pregnant despite taking the pills within 72 hours after having unprotected sex.

The "morning-after" name is somewhat misleading: You don't have to wait until the next morning to take ECPs. Emergency contraception is most effective when taken as soon as possible after unprotected sex.

Emergency contraception will not prevent pregnancy if unprotected sex happens after taking the ECPs.

Emergency contraception does not prevent all pregnancies. So see a doctor if you don't get your next expected period after taking ECPs.

Does Emergency Contraception Help Prevent STDs?
No. Emergency contraception does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms to protect against STDs even when using another birth control method.

Are There Any Side Effects With Emergency Contraception?
ECPs can cause some minor side effects for a few days, including:

nausea
vomiting
breast tenderness
headaches
spotting
These usually are minor, and most improve within 1 to 2 days. A girl's menstrual period may be temporarily irregular after she takes ECPs.

Who Can Use Emergency Contraception?
Emergency contraception is an option for a couple if:

a condom breaks or slips off
a diaphragm or cervical cap slips out of place
a hormonal method is used incorrectly (for example, birth control pills are missed for 2 days in a row)
ECPs are also available to young women who are forced to have unprotected sex.

Emergency contraception is not recommended:

for females who know they are pregnant
as a regular birth control method (it's designed for emergencies)
Where Is Emergency Contraception Available?
Some types of emergency contraceptive pills are available over the counter at drugstores and pharmacies for anyone of any age without a prescription.

One type of emergency contraception (which works well up to 5 days after unprotected sex) is only available by prescription.

A copper IUD used for emergency contraception needs to be placed by a doctor or nurse practitioner . This can be done at a doctor's office or a health clinic, like Planned Parenthood.

How Much Does Emergency Contraception Cost?
Depending on the type of pills prescribed, ECPs cost between $15–$70. Many health insurance plans cover the cost of emergency contraception and family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) charge much less.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
Someone who uses emergency contraception should call the doctor if they:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of her vaginal discharge
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex
have heavy or long-lasting vaginal bleeding
miss their period within 4 weeks of using emergency contraception

Fertility Awareness
en español: El método Ogino (o de abstinencia periódica basada en el ciclo menstrual)
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Fertility Awareness?
Fertility awareness is a way to try to prevent pregnancy by not having sex around the time of ovulation (the release of an egg during a woman's monthly cycle). Couples who want to have a baby can also use this method to plan sex during the time the woman is most likely to conceive. Fertility awareness is sometimes called natural family planning, periodic abstinence, or the rhythm method.

How Does Fertility Awareness Work?
If a couple doesn't have sex around the time of ovulation, the girl is less likely to get pregnant. The trick is knowing when ovulation happens. Couples use a calendar, a thermometer to measure body temperature, the thickness of cervical mucus, or a kit that tests for ovulation. The ovulation kits are more useful for couples who are trying to get pregnant. The fertile period around ovulation lasts 6 to 8 days. During this time, a couple using only fertility awareness for birth control should not have sex.

How Well Does Fertility Awareness Work?
Fertility awareness is not a reliable way to prevent pregnancy for most people. Over the course of a year, as many as 24 out of 100 typical couples who use fertility awareness alone will have an accidental pregnancy.

It is often very hard to tell when a girl is ovulating. She can conceive for up to 5 or 6 days before she ovulates and 1 or 2 days after. Because teens often have irregular periods, it makes predicting ovulation much harder. Even girls who usually have regular cycles can have irregular timing of ovulation from things like stress or illness. Fertility awareness requires a commitment to monitoring body changes, keeping daily records, and not having sex during the fertile period.

Does Fertility Awareness Help Prevent STDs?
No. Fertility awareness does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms to protect against STDs, even when using another birth control method.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
A girl who uses fertility awareness should call the doctor if she:

might be pregnant
has a change in the smell or color of vaginal discharge
has unexplained fever or chills
has belly or pelvic pain
has pain during sex

How Can Condoms Break?
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
My friend was using a condom and said it tore. How is that possible?
Condoms can sometimes rip or tear, but using and storing them properly can help reduce this risk.

Heat, sun, oils, and chemicals all can weaken condoms, making them more susceptible to breakage. Keep condoms away from heat and light, which can dry them out. And, don't use oils or lotions with a condom, only water-based lubricants. Carrying a condom in your wallet, where it may be folded or sat on, can also wear down the material and cause the condom to break. Also, don't open a condom with anything sharp, like scissors or teeth.

Check the expiration date on the condom. The material used to make condoms can weaken over time, so don't use one that has expired.

Condoms may rip during use if they don't fit properly or if they are not put on correctly (such as not leaving enough room at the tip of the condom). They also can tear if there is too much friction and not enough lubrication, or if the condom comes into contact with a person's nails, rings, piercings, teeth, or other sharp edges.

Condoms are the only type of birth control that can help prevent both pregnancy and STDs. So it's important to use and store them properly. A new condom should be used with each act of sex, and should be used from beginning to end.

If a condom breaks and you or your partner is concerned about pregnancy, call your health care provider or pharmacist to discuss emergency contraception. You can get emergency contraception without a prescription or your parents’ consent. If your doctor writes a prescription, it may be less expensive. And both partners should get tested for STDs. People might not know they have an infection, but if it's not treated, it could cause serious problems

How to Use a Male Condom
en español: Cómo utilizar un condón para el pene
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
Using condoms correctly, each time you have sex, can help prevent sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and pregnancy. Follow these steps to keep you and your partner safe.



What Type of Condom Should I Use?
To choose a condom:

Pick condoms made of latex or polyurethane. Latex is the best at preventing STDs. But if you or your partner is allergic to latex, use polyurethane condoms instead.
Choose condoms that are comfortable and snug. They should also have a reservoir tip (a small space at the top) to catch semen after ejaculation.
Check the condom and its wrapper. If there are any tears or defects, or if the condom is expired, don’t use it. Use a new one.
If you use a lubricant, make sure it’s water-based or silicone-based. Other types can break down the condom.

How Do I Put On a Condom?
To make sure that the condom doesn’t tear and fits snugly:

Open the condom packet carefully with your hands, not your teeth. Avoid ripping the condom.
Put the condom on before having sex and when the penis is erect. Lightly pinch the top of the condom and place it at the tip of the penis. This gets rid of trapped air, which can cause a condom to burst. If the person who will wear the condom is uncircumcised, pull back the foreskin on the penis before putting on the condom.
Roll down the condom to the base of the penis. If the condom is inside out, throw it away and use a new one.
After sex, prevent the condom from slipping off. To do this, the person wearing the condom should withdraw while holding it at the base of the penis. Then remove the condom and put it in the trash.

What Else Should I Know?
When storing condoms, keep them away from heat and light. These can make them more likely to tear. Also, don’t keep condoms in your wallet, where they can get folded and worn down.
For added protection against pregnancy, use condoms with a second method of birth control, like birth control pills.

Your doctor or pharmacist can answer questions on how to use condoms or other birth control. You can also go to a health clinic like Planned Parenthood.

Implantable Contraception
en español: Implante anticonceptivo
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Implantable Contraception?Birth Control, Implantable Contraception female
Implantable contraception (often called the birth control implant) is a small, flexible plastic tube that doctors put under the skin of the upper arm. The tube releases hormones that can help protect against pregnancy for up to 3 years.

How Does Implantable Contraception Work?
The implanted tube slowly releases low levels of the hormone progestin to prevent ovulation (the release of an egg during the monthly cycle). Without ovulation, pregnancy can't happen because there is no egg for sperm to fertilize.

The released progestin also thickens the mucus around the cervix. This makes it hard for sperm to enter the uterus and reach any eggs that may have been released. The progestin also thins the lining of the uterus so an egg will have a hard time attaching to the wall of the uterus.

How Well Does Implantable Contraception Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
Implantable contraception is a very effective method of birth control. Over the course of 1 year, fewer than 1 out of 100 typical couples using the implant will have an accidental pregnancy. The chances of getting pregnant increase if someone waits longer than 3 years to replace the tube. So it's important to keep a record of when a tube was inserted, and:

Get a new contraceptive implant on schedule.
or
Have the old tube removed and switch to another birth control method.
In general, how well each birth control method works depends on a lot of things. These include whether a girl has any health conditions or is taking medicines or herbal supplements that might affect its use.

Does Implantable Contraception Help Prevent STDs?
No. Implantable contraception does not protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Couples having sex must always use condoms along with the implant to protect against STDs.

Are There Any Side Effects From Implantable Contraception?
Contraceptive implants can sometimes cause such side effects as:

irregular periods or no periods
heavier or lighter periods
spotting between periods
weight gain, headaches, acne, and breast tenderness
depression
Some of these side effects may go away after a few months.

Sometimes there can be irritation, infection, or scarring where the tube was placed. 

Implantable contraception increases the risk of blood clots. Blood clots can lead to serious problems with the lungs, heart, and brain. Smoking cigarettes while using the implant can increase the risk of blood clots. Don't smoke if you use implantable contraception or another form of hormonal birth control.

Who Can Use Implantable Contraception?
Anyone who wants want long-term protection against pregnancy may be interested in implantable contraception.

Some health conditions make it less effective or more risky to use. The implant is not recommended for those who have had:

blood clots
liver disease
unexplained vaginal bleeding
some types of cancer
People with diabetes, migraine headaches, depression, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, gallbladder problems, seizures, kidney disease, or other medical problems should talk with their doctor.

Anyone who thinks she might be pregnant should not have a contraceptive implant inserted.

Where Can I Get Implantable Contraception?
Implantable contraception is only available from a doctor or other medical professional who has been trained to insert it. When the doctor can insert the implant depends on when you had your last period and what type of birth control you currently use.

After numbing the inside of your upper arm, the doctor will use a small needle to insert the tube under the surface. The whole process only takes a few minutes. After the tube is in, don't do any heavy lifting for a few days. You'll have a bandage on for a few days after the procedure.

A health care professional must remove the tube after 3 years. It cannot be left in the arm, even after it is no longer working. The health care professional numbs the area, makes a small cut in the arm, and pulls out the tube. The tube can be removed any time after insertion — there's no need to wait the full 3 years.

How Much Does Implantable Contraception Cost?
The cost of implantable contraception can vary, but it's often free, though there might be a charge for a doctor to place and remove the tube. Typically there are programs to waive that cost for people under the age of 21.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
If you use implantable contraception, call your doctor if you:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of your vaginal discharge
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex
have heavy or long-lasting vaginal bleeding
have an implant that comes out or moves
have redness, pus, or pain at the area where the tube was placed
have yellowing of the skin or eyes
have severe headaches
have signs of a blood clot, such as lower leg pain, chest pain, trouble breathing, weakness, tingling, trouble speaking, or vision problems


Spermicide
en español: Espermicida
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Spermicide?
Spermicides contain chemicals to stop sperm from getting to an egg. They come in several different forms: cream, gel, foam, film, and suppositories. Spermicides should be used with another birth control method, such as condoms or a diaphragm. They be used alone but are not very effective that way.

How Does Spermicide Work?
Spermicides block the cervix (the opening to the uterus) and slow sperm down to make it harder for them to swim to an egg. In order to work, the spermicide must be placed deep in the vagina close to the cervix. Creams, gels, and foams are squirted into the vagina using an applicator. Other types of spermicides include vaginal contraceptive film (VCF), a thin sheet placed in the back of vagina by hand, and vaginal suppositories.

Spermicides must be placed in the vagina before sexual intercourse. The instructions will say how long before sex the spermicide should be used. Most must be placed in the vagina at least 10 to 15 minutes before sex so they have enough time to dissolve and spread.

Many forms of spermicides are effective for only 1 hour after they are inserted. More spermicide should be used if more than 1 hour passes before sex, or if a couple is going to have sex again. A girl shouldn't douche for at least 6 hours after a couple has sex using spermicide as birth control.

How Well Does Spermicide Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
Over the course of a year, about 28 out of 100 typical couples who use spermicide will have an accidental pregnancy.

Spermicides are not as effective on their own as many other types of birth control and work best when used with another form of birth control.

Does Spermicide Help Prevent STDs?
No. Spermicide does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms to protect against STDs.

Are There Any Side Effects With Spermicide?
Spermicides may irritate the vagina and surrounding skin. This irritation may make it easier to become infected with STDs like HIV. Those who use spermicide may be more likely to develop urinary tract infections.

Who Can Use Spermicide?
Spermicide may be a good birth control option for couples who can plan in advance of having sex and who want extra protection when they use condoms or other barrier methods of contraception.

Where Is Spermicide Available?
Spermicides are available without a prescription in drugstores and some supermarkets. (In some stores, they're in the "Family Planning" aisle.) They're often found near the condoms and feminine hygiene products.

Take care when choosing a spermicide — the packages may look like those of some feminine hygiene products, such as douches or washes, which don't provide any birth control protection.

How Much Does Spermicide Cost?
Depending on the type of spermicide chosen (film is more expensive than gel), spermicide costs about $0.60 to $3 per use.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
Someone who uses spermicide should call the doctor if they:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of her vaginal discharge
develop a rash around the vagina
have pain when peeing or needs to pee often
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex

The Cervical Cap
Medically reviewed by: Larissa Hirsch, MD
Listen
Print
What Is a Cervical Cap?Birth Control, Cervical Cap
A cervical cap is a small cup made of silicone that fits over the cervix (the part of the uterus that opens into the vagina). It covers the cervix so sperm can't get in and fertilize an egg.

How Does a Cervical Cap Work?
The cervical cap keeps sperm from entering the uterus by covering the cervix. For added protection, spermicide is put into the cap before inserting the cap snugly over the cervix.

The cap can be put in several hours before having sex, and must be left in at least 6 hours after sex. The cap should not stay in longer than 24 hours after sex, or for more than a total of 48 hours. While the cap is in place, its position should be checked and spermicide should be added every time a couple has sex.

How Well Does a Cervical Cap Work?
Over the course of a year, 14 out of 100 typical couples who use a cervical cap will have an accidental pregnancy.

For women who have had a baby, the cervical cap is less effective: about 29 out of 100 of typical couples who use the cervical cap after the woman has had a baby will have an accidental pregnancy.

How well the cervical cap works depends on whether the woman uses it correctly every time.

The cap also needs to be cared for. After each use, the cap must be washed (with mild soap and water), rinsed, and air dried, then stored in its case. Don't put baby powder or oil-based lubricants (such as mineral oil, petroleum jelly, or baby oil)on the cap. Other vaginal creams, such as medicines for yeast infection, also can damage the cap.

Do Cervical Caps Help Prevent STDs?
No. The cervical cap does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms along with the cervical cap to protect against these infections.

Abstinence (not having sex) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Are There Any Problems With Cervical Caps?
Most girls who use the cervical cap have no problems. But possible side effects may include:

from the spermicide, irritation of the vagina and surrounding skin or an allergic reaction
strong odors or vaginal discharge if the cap is left in too long
an allergic raction to the material in the cap (this is rare)
changes in the cervix because of irritation
toxic shock syndrome if the cap is left in too long (this is rare)
Who Is a Cervical Cap Right for?
The cervical cap is not usually recommended for most young women and teens because it can be very hard to insert correctly. Inserting and removing a cervical cap requires a girl to reach into her vagina to the cervix with her fingers. It can sometimes also be knocked out of place during intercourse, which can lead to pregnancy. The cervical cap cannot be used when a girl has her period. It is not recommended for those with some medical conditions.

Some girls prefer the diaphragm, which works like the cervical cap but is much easier to use.

Where Are Cervical Caps Available?
A doctor or nurse practitioner must fit a girl for a cervical cap. The doctor or NP will find the right size cap and teach her how to insert and remove it.

How Much Does a Cervical Cap Cost?
Costs can range from $0 to about $275 for the cap and the office visit. A cervical cap should be replaced every year.

Many health insurance plans cover these costs, and family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) may charge less. Also, the cost of spermicide is about $0.50 to $1.50 per use.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
If you have a cervical cap, call the doctor if you:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of vaginal discharge
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex
have signs of toxic shock syndrome, such as a sunburn-like rash, achiness, fever, diarrhea, vomiting, or dizziness

The Diaphragm
en español: El diafragma
Medically reviewed by: Larissa Hirsch, MD
Listen
Print
What Is a Diaphragm?Birth Control, diaphragm
A diaphragm is a dome-shaped bowl made of thin, flexible silicone that sits over the cervix, the part of the uterus that opens into the vagina. It covers the cervix so sperm can't get in and fertilize an egg.

How Does a Diaphragm Work?
A diaphragm keeps sperm from entering the uterus by covering the cervix. For added protection, spermicide is put into the bowl of the diaphragm and along its edges before it's inserted. The diaphragm is placed high into the vagina so it covers the cervix.

The diaphragm can be put in up to 2 hours before having sex, and must be left in place at least 6 hours after sex. The diaphragm should not stay in longer than 24 hours. More spermicide must be used each time a young woman has sex while wearing the diaphragm. 

How Well Does a Diaphragm Work?
Over the course of a year, 12 out of 100 typical couples who use the diaphragm with spermicide will have an accidental pregnancy. 

How well the diaphragm works depends on:

how well it fits
whether a couple uses it every time they have sex
whether spermicide is used appropriately
A diaphragm also needs to be cared for. After each use, it must be washed (with mild soap and water), rinsed, and air dried, then stored in its case. Don't put baby powder or oil-based lubricants (such as mineral oil, petroleum jelly, or baby oil) on the diaphragm. Other vaginal creams, such as yeast infection medicines, also can damage the diaphragm.

A diaphragm should be replaced at least every 2 years. Check it regularly for holes or weak spots, and replace as needed.

Does a Diaphragm Help Prevent STDs?
No. The diaphragm does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms along with the diaphragm to protect against STDs.

Abstinence (not having sex) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Are There Any Problems With a Diaphragm?
Most young women who use a diaphragm have no problems with it. But possible side effects include:

from the spermicide, irritation of the vagina and surrounding skin or an allergic reaction
strong odors or vaginal discharge if the diaphragm is left in too long
an allergic raction to the material in the diaphragm (this is rare)
a higher risk for urinary tract infections (UTIs)
toxic shock syndrome if the diaphragm is left in too long (this is rare)
Who Is a Diaphragm Right for?
A diaphragm may be a good option for a young woman who can take responsibility for protection before having sex. With a diaphragm, she must always have a supply of spermicide.

The diaphragm isn't a good choice for anyone who is uncomfortable or uneasy with the thought of reaching into her vagina. And it may not be right for those with some medical conditions, such as frequent urinary tract infections. The diaphragm should not be used when a young woman has her period.

Where Are Diaphragms Available?
A doctor or nurse practitioner must fit a girl for a diaphragm. During a pelvic exam, the doctor or NP will find the right size diaphragm and teach her how to insert and remove it. A diaphragm that's inserted incorrectly or doesn't fit well can lead to pregnancy.

During an annual exam, the doctor or nurse will make sure the diaphragm still fits correctly. It may not fit if a girl has gained or lost weight, had a baby, had an abortion, or was fitted when she was a virgin and she is now having sex. A woman who has had any of these changes should have her doctor check the fit of the diaphragm right away rather than wait until her annual exam.

How Much Does a Diaphragm Cost?
Costs can range from $0 to about $250 for the diaphragm and the office visit. Many health insurance plans cover the costs, and family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) may charge less. Also, the cost of spermicide is about $0.50 to $1.50 per use.

A diaphragm should be replaced every 2 years.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
If you use a diaphragm, call the doctor if you:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of your vaginal discharge
have signs of a UTI, such as burning with peeing or feeling the need to pee often
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex
have signs of toxic shock syndrome, such as a sunburn-like rash, achiness, fever, diarrhea, vomiting, or dizziness

The IUD
en español: DIU
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Listen
Print
What Is an IUD?Birth Control, IUD
An intrauterine device (IUD) is a piece of T-shaped plastic, about the size of a quarter, that is placed inside the uterus to prevent pregnancy. Two types of IUDs are available: one is covered with copper, the other releases the hormone progestin.

How Does an IUD Work?
The copper-coated IUD prevents pregnancy by not allowing the sperm to fertilize the egg. It may also make it harder for a fertilized egg to implant in the uterus.

An IUD coated with progestin works in a similar way, but also thickens the cervical mucus and thins the uterine lining. In some cases, it stops ovulation (the release of an egg during the monthly cycle). This prevents sperm from fertilizing the egg and implanting.

A progestin IUD also can be used to help reduce blood flow if you have heavy or painful periods.

How Well Does an IUD Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
Both types of IUDs are very effective at preventing pregnancy. Over the course of a year, fewer than 1 out of 100 typical couples using an IUD will have an accidental pregnancy.

The copper IUD is effective as soon as it is put in and lasts up to 10 years. Progestin IUDs can work for 3 to 6 years, depending on the brand. This makes the IUD a good option for anyone who isn't ready to start a family. Even though an IUD can stay in place for a long time, the doctor or nurse practitioner can remove it at any time.

Does an IUD Help Prevent STDs?
No. The IUD does not protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Couples who are having sex must always use condoms along with the IUD to protect against STDs.

A doctor or nurse practitioner will check to be sure a woman doesn't have any STDs before putting in an IUD. Getting an IUD put in while she has an STD could lead to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).

Abstinence (not having sex) is the only method that always prevents pregnancy and STDs.

Are There Any Problems With IUDs?
The most common side effects of the IUD include:

irregular bleeding for the first few months
with the copper IUD, heavier periods with more cramps
lighter and shorter periods (or no periods) with some kinds of progestin IUDs
PMS-like symptoms such as moodiness, headaches, acne, nausea, and breast tenderness with the hormonal IUD
Rare problems include:

Expulsion. An IUD can come out of the uterus by accident (called "expulsion"). Sometimes a woman doesn't know this has happened. If an IUD comes even part of the way out, it does not protect against pregnancy. After someone has an IUD inserted, she'll need to go back for a follow-up visit to check that the IUD is properly in place.

Perforation of the uterus. There's an extremely small risk that an IUD might push through the wall of the uterus while it is being put in.

Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). There's a very low risk of infection from bacteria getting into the uterus during IUD insertion. Most such infections happen in the first 20 days after placement of the IUD.

Who Is an IUD Right for?
IUDs are a good birth control option for many people, but aren't recommended for someone:

with PID or an active STD infection
who is already pregnant or may be pregnant
who has problems with her uterus, like a disease or malformation, or has abnormal bleeding
Experts recommend IUDs as a good birth control option for younger adults and teens because they last for many years, need no daily care, and are very effective at preventing pregnancy.

Where Are IUDs Available?
An IUD must be inserted by a doctor or nurse practitioner . This can be done at the doctor’s office, or at a health clinic, like Planned Parenthood. It can be inserted anytime during a menstrual cycle as long as there's no existing pregnancy.

How Is an IUD Put In?
The doctor or nurse practitioner puts the IUD in through the vagina, past the cervix, and into the uterus. This only takes a few minutes from start to finish. You might feel some cramping during the placement, but it gets better within a few minutes.

Taking it easy for the rest of the day, using a heating pad, and taking over-the-counter pain medicine can help with any discomfort after the IUD is placed.

How Much Does an IUD Cost?
The cost  of an IUD can vary depending on your health insurance and the type of IUD. Many health insurance plans cover the costs, and family planning clinics (such as Planned Parenthood) may charge less, particularly for teens and young adults.

Because an IUD lasts for many years, the cost works out to about the same as monthly birth control methods, such as the Pill or ring.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
If you have an IUD, call the doctor if you:

might be pregnant
notice a chance in the length of the IUD string
have a change in the smell or color of vaginal discharge
have lasting cramping or pain
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex
have heavy or long-lasting vaginal bleeding

What’s a Finger Condom?
Medically reviewed by: Joy Friedman, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
A finger condom (also called a finger cot) is a thin pouch made of a stretchy material like latex. It’s placed over a finger and is often used to help prevent infection.

Why Are Finger Condoms Used?
People may use disposable finger condoms (ones that you use once then throw away) to:

avoid the spread of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) during sex using fingers (“fingering”)
keep germs from getting into cuts on fingers instead of using a bandage
Reusable finger condoms, often made of silicone or rubber, are sometimes used to help do things like turn pages. This type should not be used for cuts or sexual activity.

How Does a Finger Condom Work?
A finger condom comes rolled up like a male condom. It’s placed on the tip of the finger, then rolled down to the base.

Before using a finger condom, wash your hands. After using it, throw it out and clean your hands again. Germs may still be on or in the finger condom, so don’t try to wash and reuse it.

When using finger condoms for sex, be sure to use a new one for different parts of the body, like the vagina and anus. This helps prevent germs from spreading and causing things like urinary tract infections (UTIs).

What Problems Can Happen?
There can be problems with finger condoms, such as:

Finger condoms could fall off during use. If one stays in the body during sex and you can’t get it out with a clean finger, go to your doctor or a health clinic right away. 
Fingernails or rings can make a hole in a finger condom. If this happens, throw it away, wash your hands, and use a new one. If the finger condom broke during sex, both you and your partner should get tested for STDs. 
STDs can be on areas of skin that a finger condom doesn’t cover. So it’s possible to get an STD even if you use this type of protection. The only method that always prevents STDs (and accidental pregnancy) is abstinence (not having sex).
Where Are Finger Condoms Available?
You can buy finger condoms in drugstores and online. Your doctor’s office and health clinics like Planned Parenthood also might have them. 

What Else Should I Know?
Before using a finger condom, make sure that you and your partner aren’t allergic to the material. Some are made of latex, so if either of you has a latex allergy, choose finger condoms made of a different material. As with other types of condoms, don't use oil-based lubricants (such as mineral oil, petroleum jelly, or baby oil) because they can break down the material.

Because finger condoms could slip off, it might be safer to use disposable gloves made of latex or nitrile.

You might have questions about sex, finger condoms, or other ways to help prevent STDs and pregnancy. Talk with a parent or other trusted adult, or your doctor. You can also reach out to a health clinic.

What Is Withdrawal?
Withdrawal, also called pulling out, is when a male removes his penis from the vagina before he ejaculates during sex.

How Does Withdrawal Work?
By trying to keep sperm from entering the vagina, a person using withdrawal hopes to prevent pregnancy.

How Well Does Withdrawal Work to Prevent Pregnancy?
Over the course of a year, about 22 out of 100 typical couples who use withdrawal alone to prevent pregnancy will have an accidental pregnancy.

Even for people who think they are doing it correctly, withdrawal is not an effective way to prevent pregnancy. Some sperm leak out of the penis even before ejaculation. So even by pulling out before ejaculation, pregnancy can still happen. Also, if the guy ejaculates close to the outside of the vagina, the sperm can swim up into the vagina. Still, withdrawal is considered a better method of contraception than none at all.

Does Withdrawal Help Prevent STDs?
No. Withdrawal does not protect against STDs. Couples having sex must always use condoms to protect against STDs even when using another method of birth control.

When Should I Call the Doctor?
Call the doctor if you used the withdrawal method and are concerned that you:

might be pregnant
have a change in the smell or color of vaginal discharge
have unexplained fever or chills
have belly or pelvic pain
have pain during sex

STDs AND OTHER INFECDTIONS

Getting tested for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) is important if you’re going to have sex or have already had it. These infections spread from person to person during vaginal, oral, or anal sex; using fingers ("fingering"); or other sexual contact.
But sometimes you may feel like you can’t talk with your parents about getting checked. You still need to make your health a priority, though. Here are some tips about how to keep STD testing private.

How Can I Get Tested for STDs Privately?
Ask your doctor to talk only to you. In most states, once you’re 13, you can get tested and treated for STDs without a parent knowing. Many doctors will agree to treat patients this age and older confidentially. That means they won't tell parents or anyone else unless you say it's OK. So you can ask if your own doctor will do so.

Visit a health clinic. Sometimes you may not want your doctor to do STD testing. Instead, you can go to a health clinic like Planned Parenthood. The visit is private. Some schools also run health clinics, but ask first to make sure things will be kept between you and the doctor or nurse.

What Else Should I Know?
Just as being tested for STDs is important, so is preventing them. The only way to completely avoid getting STDs is to not have sex. If you do have sex, use condoms or other barrier methods like dental dams or finger condoms every time. Unprotected sex can lead to STDs and sometimes accidental pregnancy. Wherever you go for testing, you should also be able to get information on STD prevention and birth control.

If you'd like some support when you go to get checked, ask a trusted adult or friend to go with you.

Even if you’re not comfortable talking with your parents about STD testing, know that they can likely give you good advice on lots of other things.

Chlamydia
en español: Clamidia
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Chlamydia?
Chlamydia (pronounced: kluh-MID-ee-uh) is a common, curable sexually transmitted disease (STD). Treatment can stop the spread of the infection and help prevent long-lasting problems.

What Are STDs?
STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal). Some STDs can spread through close contact with the genitals or body fluids.

How Do People Get Chlamydia?
Chlamydia spreads through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal) with someone who has the infection. Most people with chlamydia don’t have symptoms, so they may spread the infection without realizing it.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Chlamydia?
Chlamydia usually doesn't cause symptoms. If it does, they can include:

discharge from the vagina, penis, or anus
pain in the lower belly
fever
pain when peeing
What Causes Chlamydia?
A type of bacteria, Chlamydia trachomatis, causes chlamydia.

How Is Chlamydia Diagnosed?
To find out if someone has chlamydia, health care providers do tests on:

fluid or discharge from the vagina, urethra, eye, or anus
urine (pee)
How Is Chlamydia Treated?
Health care providers treat chlamydia with antibiotics. It is important to get tested again 3 months after treatment to make sure the infection is cured, even if a person has no symptoms.

For the infection to go away, someone needs to:

Take the antibiotics exactly as prescribed. They should not stop taking the medicine early because the infection could come back.
Tell all partners from the last 2 months to get tested and treated (even if they don’t have symptoms).
Not have sex until they and their partners are treated and any symptoms of chlamydia are gone (such as pain in the lower belly; fever; unusual discharge from the vagina, penis, or anus; and pain when peeing).
People can get chlamydia again if:

Their partners aren't treated with antibiotics.
They get treated but then have sex with someone else who has chlamydia.
What Problems Can Happen?
If it's not treated, chlamydia can lead to:

in girls: pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can damage the reproductive system
in guys: swelling in the testicles and tubes at the back of the testicles
infertility: trouble getting pregnant (for girls) or getting someone pregnant (for guys)
Can Chlamydia Be Prevented?
The only way to prevent chlamydia and other STDs is to not have sex (oral, vaginal, or anal). If someone decides to have sex, they can lower their risk of getting an STD by:

using a latex condom every time they have sex (vaginal, oral, or anal)
getting tested with any new partners before having sex
only having sex with one partner (who doesn’t have sex with other people)
Anyone who is sexually active should get tested for STDs every year (or more often if recommended by their health care provider

Do I Need a Pelvic Exam if I Had the HPV Vaccine?
en español: ¿Necesito hacerme un examen pélvico si tengo las vacunas contra el VPH?
Medically reviewed by: Christina M. Shultz, MD and Taina A. Trevino, MD
Learn About Primary Care Pediatrics at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
Do I still have to get pelvic exams even though I've had my HPV vaccines?
You might need to get a pelvic exam, but it depends on how old you are and if you're having problems. Young women don't usually get their first pelvic exam until they are in their twenties, unless they're having problems like lower belly pain, abnormal discharge, or period trouble.

Doctors recommend starting to see a gynecologist when you're 13–15 years old. Most of the time, teen gyn visits don't involve a pelvic exam. The doctor or nurse practitioner will decide if you need one based on your medical history and physical health. If they recommend one, a pelvic exam can help find any problems so they can be treated and not get worse.

If you've ever had sex, you should be tested for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) — even if you've had the full series of HPV shots. That's because the HPV vaccine only protects against HPV, not other STDs. People can have STDs like chlamydia and gonorrhea without knowing it.

STD tests don't always require a pelvic exam. Depending on what test you're getting, your doctor may be able to use a urine (pee) sample, blood sample, or a vaginal swab. Usually doctors only do a pelvic exam if there are specific symptoms that indicate a problem.

If you have sex, including oral or anal sex, always use condoms to help prevent STDs.

Genital Herpes
en español: Herpes genital
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Genital Herpes?
Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted disease (STD). There's no cure for genital herpes, but medicines can help control the infection.

What Are STDs?
STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal) or close sexual contact.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Genital Herpes?
Most people with genital herpes don't have any symptoms. They may not even know they have it.

Some people with genital herpes can have "outbreaks" of sores in the genital and anal area. (Genitals are the sexual or reproductive organs that are on the outside of the body.) The sores heal within a few weeks. Outbreaks can be brought on by stress, illness, being overly tired, or being in sunlight. Girls can have outbreaks when they get their periods.

The first outbreak often is the most severe. Outbreaks usually become less severe over time.

What Causes Genital Herpes?
Two viruses cause genital herpes:

herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)
herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2)
HSV-1 is the virus that causes cold sores around the mouth. It can cause genital herpes when it spreads through oral sex. But most of the time, genital herpes is caused by HSV-2.

How Do People Get Genital Herpes?
People can get infected with genital herpes when the virus comes into contact with a break in the skin in or around the mouth or genital area. This can happen when:

They have vaginal or anal sex with someone with genital herpes (even if there are no sores).
They receive oral sex from a partner who has oral herpes (cold sores).
They touch a herpes sore and then touch their own genitals.
Their genitals touch the skin in the genital area of someone who is infected (even if there are no sores).
Genital herpes can spread even if there are no sores because the virus is still in the body. The virus can be in the skin near the genitals and infect another person during sexual contact.

How Is Genital Herpes Diagnosed?
To find out if someone has genital herpes, health care providers do tests on:

fluid from a sore
blood (if no sores are present)
People with genital herpes need to tell recent, current, and future sex partners about their infection. Because someone may never have symptoms or may not have symptoms for months to years after infection, a current partner may not be the source of the infection.

How Is Genital Herpes Treated?
There is no cure for genital herpes. But health care providers can prescribe medicine to:

stop outbreaks
make outbreaks happen less often and be less severe if they do happen
reduce the risk of spreading genital herpes to others
Can Genital Herpes Be Prevented?
The only way to prevent genital herpes and other STDs is abstinence. This means not having sex (oral, vaginal, or anal). If someone decides to have sex, using a latex condom every time can prevent most STDs.

But condoms can't always prevent the spread of genital herpes. This is because the virus may be in the skin near the genitals (and not covered by a condom).

People also can lower their risk of getting an STD by:

getting tested with any new partners before having sex
only having sex with one partner (who doesn’t have sex with other people)
People who are sexually active should get tested for STDs every year or more often if recommended by their health care provider. To find a testing site near you, visit the CDC's National HIV and STD Testing Resources.

What Else Should I Know?
Genital herpes is a lifelong condition, but there are ways to manage it. If you have genital herpes:

Take medicines to stop outbreaks or make them less frequent and less severe.
Help reduce the risk of spreading genital herpes to others by taking medicines, always using a condom during sex, and avoiding sex during outbreaks.


What Are Genital Warts?
Genital warts are warts that are on or near the vagina or penis (the genitals).

What Causes Genital Warts?
Genital warts are usually a sexually transmitted disease (STD). They're caused by HPV (human papillomavirus). This virus also can cause some types of cancer. But the types of HPV that cause genital warts do not usually cause cancer.

What Are STDs?
STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal), or close sexual contact.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Genital Warts?
Many people infected with HPV never get warts. If warts do develop, they usually come within a few months. But sometimes, they show up years later.

The warts can be on or near the vulva, vagina, cervix, penis, scrotum, or anus.

Genital warts can be raised or flat, small or large. Sometimes they're grouped together in a cauliflower-like shape. Some warts can be so small and flat that they're not noticed right away.

Most of the time, genital warts are painless. Some people may have itching, bleeding, burning, or pain.
How Do People Get Genital Warts?
The HPV that causes genital warts usually spreads through vaginal, oral, or anal sex or close sexual contact with the genital area. Even if there are no warts, HPV might still be active in the genital area and can spread to others.

It is not always possible for people to know when they got infected with HPV. This is because:
The virus can be in the body for months to years before warts develop.
They might have had warts before that weren't noticed.
How Are Genital Warts Diagnosed?
Health care providers usually can diagnose genital warts by looking at them. Sometimes, doctors take a small sample of the wart to send to a lab for testing. This usually isn't painful.

How Are Genital Warts Treated?
Treatments to remove genital warts include:

medicines put on or into the warts
lasers, cold, or heat put on the warts
surgery
Sometimes, warts come back after treatment. This is because the treatments can't get rid of all of the HPV in the body.

How Long Do Genital Warts Last?
How long genital warts last can vary from person to person. Sometimes, the immune system clears the warts within a few months. But even if the warts go away, the HPV might still be active in the body. So the warts can come back. Usually within 2 years, the warts and the HPV are gone from the body.

When Is Someone With Genital Warts No Longer Contagious?
People with genital warts definitely can spread HPV. But even after the warts are gone, HPV might still be active in the body. That means it can spread to someone else through sex or close sexual contact and cause warts in that person. It's hard to know when people are no longer contagious, because there's no blood test that looks for HPV.

Most of the time, HPV is gone within 2 years of when someone was infected.
Can Genital Warts Be Prevented?
Genital warts and other types of HPV can be prevented by a vaccine. The HPV vaccine series is recommended for all kids when they're 9–11 years old. Teens and adults (up to age 45) also can get the vaccine. Even if someone already has had one type of HPV infection, the HPV vaccine can protect against other types of HPV.

HPV almost always spreads through sex. So another way to prevent genital warts is to not have sex (vaginal, oral, or anal). If someone does decide to have sex, using a condom every time for sex (vaginal, oral, anal) helps prevent HPV and other STDs. But condoms can't always prevent HPV because they don't cover all areas where HPV can live.
Should Sexual Partners Be Told About Genital Warts?
Yes. Someone diagnosed with genital warts should have an honest conversation with sexual partners. Partners need to be seen by a health care provider who can check for genital warts and do screenings for other STDs.

If the couple plan to continue having sex, both people need to understand that a condom will help lower the risk of spreading genital warts/HPV but can't completely prevent it.
Looking Ahead
If you or someone you know has been diagnosed with genital warts, it is important to:

Know that HPV can spread to partners during sex, even if there are no warts.
Tell any sexual partners about the warts before having sex.
Use a condom every time they have sex (vaginal, oral, or anal).
Get tested for other STDs as recommended by your health care provider.
Get all doses of the HPV vaccine.

Gonorrhea
en español: Gonorrhea
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Gonorrhea?
Gonorrhea (pronounced: gah-nuh-REE-uh) is a sexually transmitted disease (STD).

What Are STDs?
STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal). Some STDs can spread through close contact with the genitals or body fluids.

How Do People Get Gonorrhea?
Gonorrhea spreads through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal) with someone who has the infection.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Gonorrhea?
Someone with gonorrhea may have:

discharge from the vagina, penis, or anus 
in men, pain in testicles
in women, vaginal bleeding between periods
pain in the lower belly
pain when peeing
rectal pain, especially when having a bowel movement (pooping)
Many people with gonorrhea have no symptoms. They can spread the infection to others without knowing it.

What Causes Gonorrhea?
A type of bacteria  called Neisseria gonorrhoeae causes gonorrhea.

How Is Gonorrhea Diagnosed?
To find out if someone has gonorrhea, health care providers do tests on:

urine (pee)
fluid or discharge from the vagina, cervix (opening to the womb), urethra (where pee comes out), throat, or anus
How Is Gonorrhea Treated?
Health care providers treat gonorrhea with an antibiotic. It is given as a shot in the doctor's office. It is important to get tested again 3 months after treatment to make sure the infection is cured (even if there are no symptoms).

All sexual partners from the past 2 months need treatment too, even if they don't have signs of gonorrhea.

If someone still has symptoms after treatment, they may need treatment with different antibiotics. Or they may have been infected with gonorrhea again.

You should not have sex again until:

at least 7 days after you and your sexual partner(s) take the antibiotics
you and your sexual partner(s) do not have signs of gonorrhea
People can get gonorrhea again if:

Their partners aren't treated.
They get treated but then have sex with someone else who has gonorrhea.
What Problems Can Happen?
If it's not treated, gonorrhea can lead to:

in girls: pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), which can damage the reproductive system, making it hard or impossible for a woman to get pregnant later on
in guys: swelling in the testicles and tubes at the back of the testicles, possibly preventing a man from fathering kids later on
problems peeing due to scars in the urethra
infection of the blood that can lead to joint problems and other problems
Can Gonorrhea Be Prevented?
The only way to prevent gonorrhea and other STDs is to not have sex (oral, vaginal, or anal). If you decide to have sex, using a latex condom every time can prevent most STDs.

If you are sexually active, get tested for STDs every year, or more often as recommended by your health care provider. This way, you can get treated right away if you get an STD.

Hepatitis
en español: Hepatitis
Medically reviewed by: Elana Pearl Ben-Joseph, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Hepatitis?
Hepatitis (pronounced: hep-uh-TIE-tiss) is an inflammation of the liver. The liver, in the right side of the abdomen, is an important organ that processes nutrients, metabolizes medicines, and helps clear toxins from the body.

Most cases of hepatitis are caused by a virus. The three most common hepatitis viruses are hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. (Hepatitis viruses D and E are rare in the United States.)

Hepatitis that's not caused by a virus can happen from things such as:

a bacterial infection
liver injury caused by a toxin (poison)
liver damage caused by interruption of the organ's normal blood supply
liver damage caused by interruption of the flow of bile through the liver
abdominal trauma in the area of the liver
an attack on the liver by the body's own immune system (called autoimmune hepatitis)
a problem with the liver itself
What Is Hepatitis A?
Hepatitis A is contagious, and usually spreads through food, drink, or objects contaminated by feces (poop) containing the hepatitis A virus. The hepatitis A vaccine has made the infection less common in the United States and other developed countries.

This virus can cause severe symptoms, but unlike some other hepatitis viruses, it rarely leads to long-lasting liver damage. People recover from hepatitis A have immunity to the virus and won't get it again.

Read more about hepatitis A.

What Is Hepatitis B?
Hepatitis B is a more serious infection. It can lead to cirrhosis (permanent scarring) of the liver, liver failure, or liver cancer, causing severe illness and even death.

The hepatitis B virus spreads from person to person through blood or other body fluids. In the United States, this most commonly happens through unprotected sex with someone who's infected or from injecting drugs with shared needles that aren't sterilized. It also can pass from an infected mother to her unborn baby.

The hepatitis B vaccine is approved for people of all ages to prevent HBV infection.

Read more about hepatitis B.

What Is Hepatitis C?
The hepatitis C virus spreads from person to person through blood or other body fluids, and can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer. The most common way people become infected is by sharing drug equipment such as needles and straws. People also can get hepatitis C from unprotected sex with an infected partner. And it can pass from an infected mother to her unborn baby.

Hepatitis C is the most serious type of hepatitis. It's now one of the most common reasons for liver transplants in adults. Scientists have been trying for decades to develop a hepatitis C vaccine, so far without success. Fortunately, medicines can now treat people with hepatitis C and cure them in most cases.

Hepatitis C
en español: Hepatitis C
Medically reviewed by: Jolanda M. Denham, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Hepatitis C?
Hepatitis C is an infection of the liver caused by the hepatitis C virus (HCV). HCV can lead to liver failure, liver cancer, or chronic liver disease (cirrhosis). HCV infections are a leading reason for liver transplants in the United States.

Some people with HCV have just a short-term illness because their bodies can get rid of the virus. But most infected people (70%–85%) develop a chronic (long-lasting) HCV infection.

How Do People Get Hepatitis C?
HCV spreads by direct contact with an infected person's blood and other body fluids. This can happen through:

sharing drug needles and intranasal (snorting) drug devices
getting a tattoo or body piercing with unsterilized tools
sexual contact (although this is less common)
passing of the infection from a pregnant woman to her unborn child
Thanks to blood screening and other health care safety rules adopted in the early 1990s, the spread of HCV from hemodialysis, blood transfusions, or organ transplants is now rare.

It's also rare, but possible, for someone to get HCV by sharing household items that might contain an infected person's blood, such as razors, toothbrushes, or scissors.

Who Is at Risk for Hepatitis C?
HCV is more common in adults than in kids. Rates of HCV infection in the United States almost tripled from 2010 to 2015, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Most of these new infections are in young adults (20 to 29 years old) who inject drugs. Many of them went from abusing prescription drugs to injecting heroin, which often is cheaper and easier to get. Health experts worry that more newborns will be at risk for HCV because so many young women are part of this group.

What Is Chronic Hepatitis C?
Doctors refer to hepatitis C infections as either acute or chronic:

An acute HCV infection is a short-term illness that clears within 6 months of when a person is exposed to the virus.
A person who still has HCV after 6 months is said to have a chronic hepatitis C infection. This is a long-term illness, meaning the virus stays in the body and can cause lifelong illness. An estimated 3.2 million people in the U.S. have chronic HCV.
What Are the Signs & Symptoms of HCV Infection?
Most people with HCV have no symptoms. But even without symptoms, they can develop health problems decades later and can still pass the disease to others.

If symptoms do happen, it's usually when the disease is very advanced. Symptoms can be similar to those of hepatitis A and hepatitis B and include:

jaundice (when the skin and whites of the eyes look yellow)
fever
nausea, vomiting, and lack of appetite
belly pain (on the upper right side)
joint pain
darker than usual urine (pee) or gray-colored stools
What Problems Can Hepatitis C Cause?
Hepatitis C is the most serious type of hepatitis. It's now one of the most common reasons for liver transplants in adults. Every year, almost 20,000 people in the United States die from HCV.

Fortunately, medicines can now treat people with hepatitis C and cure them in most cases.

How Is Hepatitis C Diagnosed?
Doctors do a blood test to look for antibodies to hepatitis C. If antibodies are present, it only means that the person has had an HCV infection at some point. To see if the disease is still active, doctors do another test to measure the level of HCV in the blood.

The CDC recommends the diagnostic blood test for:

all Americans born between 1945–1965 (baby boomers)
anyone who has ever injected drugs
patients who received donated blood or organs before 1992
people who get hemodialysis
people who have conditions such as HIV or chronic liver disease
newborns born to mothers with HCV
people exposed to the blood of someone with HCV
How Is Hepatitis C Treated?
Significant progress has been made in treating and even curing hepatitis C. Older hepatitis C treatments usually required weekly injections, had serious side effects, and often were not effective.

New and better oral medicines now can cure HCV for many people within 3 months. The new medicines were very expensive at first, but their prices have come down, a trend that health experts hope will continue as the incidence of HCV rises and increased screening brings more cases to light.

These medicines successfully cure about 90% of HCV patients. A new oral medicine under development looks promising for the 10% who don't respond to the standard treatment. This new antiviral combination pill is currently under review by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

What Happens After a Hepatitis C Infection?
As with hepatitis B, anyone who has ever tested positive for hepatitis C cannot be a blood donor.

People who had HCV as a result of drug use should get counseling or further treatment to help them overcome their addiction. Otherwise, they could become reinfected with HCV.

Can Hepatitis C Be Prevented?
Unfortunately, there's no vaccine to protect against hepatitis C. Prevention means avoiding risky behaviors that can spread HCV, especially injecting drugs.

HIV and AIDS
en español: Virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (VIH) y el SIDA
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Learn About Infectious Disease Care at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
What Are HIV and AIDS?
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is a virus that attacks the immune system.
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) is a late stage of HIV infection.
There's no cure for HIV/AIDS, but medicines can help people live long, healthy lives.

What Happens In HIV Infection?
HIV attacks cells in the immune system called CD4 cells (or T cells). CD4 cells help the body fight off infections and some kinds of cancers.

What Happens In AIDS?
Over time, HIV kills more and more CD4 cells, and this leads to AIDS. In AIDS, the immune system is severely weakened. Serious infections and health problems happen.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of HIV?
Symptoms depend on what stage of HIV infection someone has.

Acute HIV infection: This is when someone is first infected with the virus. Symptoms usually start about 2–4 weeks after infection and last a few days to a few weeks. They can include fever, headache, muscle aches, swollen glands, and a rash. Some people have very mild symptoms or don’t notice any symptoms.

Chronic HIV infection: During this next stage, a person may have no symptoms or mild symptoms. People can stay in this stage for 5–10 years, but some move to the next stage (AIDS) faster.

AIDS is the most severe stage of HIV infection. Symptoms can include:

very fast weight loss
fever
extreme tiredness
swollen glands
a lung infection called pneumocystis pneumonia
diarrhea
sores of the mouth, anus, and genitals
some types of cancers
skin problems
How Do People Get HIV?
HIV spreads when infected blood or body fluids (such as semen or vaginal fluids) enter the body. This can happen:

during sex (especially anal sex and vaginal sex)
through sharing needles for injecting drugs or tattooing
by getting stuck with a needle that has an infected person's blood on it
HIV also can pass from mother to child during pregnancy, childbirth, or breastfeeding.

HIV does NOT spread through:

pee, poop, spit, throw-up, or sweat (as long as no blood is present)
coughing or sneezing
holding hands
sharing eating utensils or drinking glasses
How Is HIV Diagnosed?
Health care providers usually diagnose HIV through blood tests. Someone who has HIV is said to be "HIV positive."

Home tests also are available without a prescription at the drugstore.

How Is HIV Treated?
Most people with HIV can stay healthy by taking medicines called antiretrovirals. Antiretrovirals help lower the viral load (how much HIV is in the body) so that the CD4 count can go up.

The goal of treatment is for the viral load to be undetectable (this means there is too little virus to show up on blood tests). Getting to an undetectable viral load takes at least 3–6 months on medicine. Continuing to take the medicine can keep the virus at undetectable levels. If medicines are stopped, the virus levels will go up.

What Can Help Prevent HIV?
To lower their risk of getting HIV, people should:

Avoid sharing any kind of needle.
Avoid sharing razors or other personal objects that may touch blood.
Not touch anyone else's blood (such as from a cut or sore).
Use a latex condom every time they have sex (including vaginal, oral, or anal sex).
What Can Help Prevent the Spread of HIV to Others?
People who have HIV should:

Take antiretrovirals as instructed by their care team.
Not share any kind of needle.
Not share razors or other personal objects that may touch blood.
Keep cuts and sores covered with a bandage.
If they're sexually active, they also should:

Talk to sexual partners about their HIV status (this is a law in some states) and about getting tested. To find a testing site, visit the CDC's National HIV and STD Testing Resources. Their partners can consider taking a medicine every day (called PrEP or pre-exposure prophylaxis) to lower the risk of getting infected with HIV.
Someone who takes antiretrovirals exactly as prescribed and whose viral load is undetectable won’t spread HIV to others through sex. There is a very small chance that they could pass it in another way (such as through breastfeeding or sharing needles).

What Else Should I Know?
By taking medicines and getting regular medical care, HIV-positive people can live long and healthy lives.

If you have HIV or AIDS, be sure to:

go to all doctor visits
take all medicines exactly as directed
go for all follow-up blood tests
understand what HIV/AIDS is and how it spreads
be physically active, get enough sleep, and eat well
The medical care team is there for you. They'll help you get the best treatment, and can offer support.

How Do People Get AIDS?
en español: ¿Cómo contrae alguien el SIDA?
Medically reviewed by: Joy Friedman, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
What Are HIV and AIDS?
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is a virus that attacks the immune system, the body’s defense against infections.

AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) can happen after someone has had HIV for many years and isn’t treated. If HIV becomes AIDS, the immune system can’t fight germs well. So people with AIDS often get serious infections and health problems. But not all people with HIV will develop AIDS.

How Does HIV Spread?
HIV spreads when blood, semen ("cum"), or vaginal fluids that have HIV enter the body. Because symptoms can be mild at first, people with HIV might not know they have it and could possibly spread it to other people.

Someone could get HIV:

during sex (especially anal and vaginal sex)
through sharing needles for injecting drugs or tattooing
by getting stuck with a needle that has blood with HIV
HIV also can pass from mother to child during pregnancy, childbirth, or breastfeeding.

HIV does not spread through:

pee, poop, spit, vomit, or sweat (as long as there isn’t any blood)
sharing drinking glasses or eating utensils (like forks, spoons, knives, or chopsticks)
coughing or sneezing
holding hands, hugging, or kissing
How Can I Protect Myself From HIV?
The best way to protect yourself from HIV is to not share needles and not have sex. This includes vaginal, anal, or oral sex; sex using fingers; or other sexual contact.

If you decide to have sex, you can reduce your risk of getting HIV by:

Using protection like a condom, finger condom, or dental dam each time you have sex.
Having just one sexual partner.
Getting tested for HIV and making sure your partner does too.
Being tested and treated for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs). Having an STD increases a person's chances of getting HIV. For example, some STDs cause sores through which HIV could enter the body.
Taking a kind of medicine called PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis). PrEP helps prevent HIV from spreading when condoms break, aren’t used, or aren’t used the whole time during sex. But PrEP doesn’t protect against other STDs.
What Else Should I Know?
Medicines can help people with HIV stay healthy. They can also prevent HIV from becoming AIDS.

Knowing about AIDS and how HIV spreads can help you make safer choices about sex. Talk with your doctor if you have any questions about AIDS and HIV, or want to get tested.

If you think you might have HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), it’s a good idea to get tested. If you have it, you can start treatment and prevent spreading HIV, a virus that attacks the immune system, to others.

Even if you don’t think you could have HIV, your doctor may want you to get tested to confirm you don’t have the virus. It’s recommended that everyone older than age 13 have an HIV test at least once.

To get tested for HIV you can:

Ask your doctor.
Go to a health clinic like Planned Parenthood.
Visit the CDC’s GetTested or call 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) to find a testing center.
Buy a test online or at a drugstore and do it at home. You don’t need a prescription from your doctor.
In most states, you don’t need a parent's permission to buy the test or get checked for HIV. Many testing centers will do an HIV test for free, but ask if there’s a fee before you go.

How Do HIV Tests Work?
Most HIV tests use a blood sample, either from a blood draw (using a needle to take blood from your arm) or fingerstick. Others use saliva (spit), but this is less precise than blood tests.

Some tests look for HIV itself. But most look for HIV antibodies (parts of the immune system that fight the virus). When someone has HIV, the body makes antibodies to try to get rid of it.

Test results might be ready that day or take longer to come back.

Does HIV Always Show Up on Tests?
If someone got HIV recently, it might not show up on a test. How fast HIV appears depends on the kind of test done:

Testing that looks for the virus itself can find HIV 7‒28 days after infection.
Testing that looks for HIV antibodies can find them 3‒12 weeks after infection.
Who Will Know the Results of My HIV Test?
Testing sites have different privacy rules. If you go to an anonymous test site, only you know the results. No written record of the test result is kept.

If you go to a confidential test site, the results will go in your medical record. Positive results (meaning you have HIV) are sent to the state or local health department. Your insurance company will be able to see your results. And in some states, your parent or guardian may be contacted.

Before getting tested, you can ask about the site’s privacy rules.

What Happens if My HIV Test Is Positive?
With early treatment, people with HIV can stay healthy and live about as long as people who don’t have the virus.

People at the testing site can help you get the right care and support. You can get advice on things like how to tell your parents and find a doctor who's an HIV specialist.

If My HIV Test Is Negative, Do I Need to Get Tested Again?
If your HIV test is negative, ask at the testing site to see if you need to get checked again.

Some reasons to get tested again include if you:

have sex without a condom
are a male and have sex with other males
have had sex with more than three people in the past year
get a sexually transmitted disease (STD) (also called a sexually transmitted infection or STI)
share needles to inject drugs or get tattoos
are pregnant
If My HIV Test Is Negative, Does that Mean My Partner Doesn't Have HIV?
If your HIV test is negative, your partner could still have HIV. The only way to be sure is for them to also get tested.

How Can I Lower My Chances of Getting HIV?
You can reduce the risk of getting HIV by not having sex (called abstinence).

If you do have sex, use protection like a condom, finger condom, or dental dam each time. This includes vaginal, anal, or oral sex; sex using fingers; or other sexual contact. Have just one sexual partner and make sure the person has been tested for HIV. Also, be sure to get tested for STDs because having an STD makes it easier to get HIV. For example, some STDs cause sores through which HIV could enter the body.

It’s also important to not share needles for things like injecting drugs or getting tattoos.

HPV Vaccine
en español: Vacuna contra el virus del papiloma humano (VPH)
Medically reviewed by: Elana Pearl Ben-Joseph, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
What Is HPV and Why Is It a Problem?
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a virus that can cause different types of cancer (such as cancer of the vagina, cervix, vulva, penis, anus, and throat) as well as genital warts. Research suggests that HPV may be linked to heart disease in women.

People can get HPV from sexual contact (including vaginal, oral, and anal sex) and from some types of skin-to skin-contact. Most people infected with HPV don't know they have it because they don't notice any signs or problems. People do not always get genital warts, but the virus is still in their system and could cause damage. This means that people with HPV can pass the infection to others without knowing it.

The vaccine is an important and effective step in preventing infection and protecting against the spread of HPV.

When Do People Get the HPV Vaccine?
Doctors recommend the vaccine for girls and boys 11–12 years old (though kids as young as 9 also can get it) and for older kids who aren't yet vaccinated.

The vaccine is given as a series of shots:

Kids and teens ages 9–14 get the HPV vaccine in 2 shots over a 6- to 12-month period.
Teens and young adults (ages 15–26) get it in 3 shots over a 6-month period. People with weak immune systems also get 3 shots, including those 9–14 years old.
Teens or young adults who didn't start or complete the series of shots can get it up to age 45.

How Does the HPV Vaccine Work?
The HPV vaccine contains a small piece of the virus that teaches the immune system to make antibodies against HPV. It doesn't contain live virus, so it can't cause HPV infection.

It works best when people get all their shots on time. If you're under age 26 and you've missed a shot, you can still catch up. Just ask your doctor about the best way to do that.

The vaccine does not protect people against strains of HPV that might have infected them before getting the vaccine. The most effective way to prevent HPV infection is to get vaccinated before having sex for the first time. But even if you have had sex, it's still the best way to protect against strains of the virus that you may not have come in contact with.

The vaccine doesn't protect against all types of HPV. Anyone having sex should get routine checkups at a doctor's office or health clinic. It's important to get Pap smears when a doctor recommends it — for most girls, that's usually around age 21 unless there are signs of a problem before that.

The HPV vaccine is not a replacement for using condoms to protect against other strains of HPV — and other STDs — when having sex.

What Are the Side Effects of the HPV Vaccine?
Side effects that people get from the HPV vaccine usually are minor. They may include swelling or pain at the injection site, or feeling faint after getting the vaccine. As with other vaccines, there is a rare chance of an allergic reaction.

A few people have reported health problems after getting the shot. The FDA is monitoring the vaccine closely to make sure these are not caused by the vaccine itself.

Most people have no trouble with the vaccine. You can make fainting less likely by sitting down for 15 minutes after each shot.

How Can I Protect Myself From HPV?
The most important way to protect against HPV infection is by getting the HPV vaccine.

For people who have sex, condoms offer some protection against HPV. Condoms can't completely prevent infections because hard-to-see warts can be outside the area covered by a condom, and the virus can infect people even when a partner doesn't have warts. Also, condoms can break.

The only way to be completely sure about preventing HPV infections and other STDs is not to have sex (abstinence). Spermicidal foams, creams, and jellies aren't proven to protect against HPV or genital warts.

If you have questions about the vaccine or are worried about STDs, talk to your doctor.

Is My Vaginal Discharge Normal?
Medically reviewed by: Joy Friedman, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
What Is Discharge and Is It Normal to Have It?
Vaginal discharge (or just “discharge”) is a fluid that comes from the vagina. It might be in your underwear or on toilet paper when you wipe. You may start to notice it about 6 months to 1 year before you get your first period. It’s perfectly normal to have discharge.

Vaginal discharge keeps the vagina clean and moist, and helps prevent and fight infections. The color, texture, and amount of discharge can change during your menstrual cycle (the time from one period to the next). But some changes may mean there’s a problem.

What Is Normal Vaginal Discharge?
Normal vaginal discharge can be somewhat thin, sticky, and elastic — or thick and gooey. It’s clear, white, or off-white. When discharge dries on underwear or a pantiliner, it may look yellow. Discharge often has a slight odor but it isn’t a bad smell.

Vaginal discharge can vary. You could have a lot of vaginal discharge and want to wear a pantiliner to keep your underwear dry. Or you may not have much discharge at all.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of a Vaginal Discharge Problem?
These signs can mean there's a problem with your vaginal discharge:

a change in:
smell: mainly a “fishy” odor
color: like green or gray
texture: like foam, cottage cheese, or pus
itching, burning, swelling, or redness in the vagina
vaginal bleeding or spotting that’s not a period
What Can Cause Changes in Vaginal Discharge?
Changes in vaginal discharge can mean that there’s an infection. Yeast infections can happen in females whether or not they’ve had sex. Other infections, like bacterial vaginosis and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are more common in those who've been sexually active.

Discharge can also change when certain products touch the vagina. These include scented pads and tampons, scented soaps, bubble baths and bath bombs, and clothing washed in scented detergent. The discharge might return to normal after someone stops using the products.

What Should I Do if My Vaginal Discharge Changes?
If your vaginal discharge changes and it doesn’t seem like it’s due to your menstrual cycle, talk with your doctor right away. The changes could be signs of an STD if you’ve had sex. (Sometimes STDs have no symptoms though, so that’s why regular STD testing is important.)

When the cause of your discharge change is figured out, you can get a treatment that should help.

Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID)
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID)?
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and/or uterus. It is usually caused by an STD (sexually transmitted disease). Treatment with antibiotics can help prevent long-lasting problems.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of PID?
The most common symptom of PID is lower belly pain. The pain may get worse during sex.

Other symptoms may include:

vaginal discharge
pain when peeing
irregular periods or spotting
Sometimes girls with PID have no symptoms.

What Causes PID?
Pelvic inflammatory disease is usually caused by a sexually transmitted disease (STD). STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections, or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal). Chlamydia and gonorrhea are the STDs that most often lead to PID.

Who Gets PID?
Sexually active girls can get PID. It happens more often in girls who have more than one sexual partner.

You can get pelvic inflammatory disease more than once if partners with STDs don't get treatment, or if you have sex with someone else who has an STD.

How Is PID Diagnosed?
To find out if someone has PID, health care providers:

ask about sexual activity
ask about symptoms
do a physical exam, including a pelvic exam
test urine (pee) and vaginal discharge for STDs
Sometimes more testing is needed. For example, an ultrasound or CT scan may be done to look at the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries.

How Is PID Treated?
Health care providers treat PID with antibiotics . All sexual partners from the past 2 months also need treatment. Sometimes the health care provider can prescribe antibiotics for someone’s partner(s) too.

Girls who are getting treated for PID should not have sex until:

treatment is finished and there are no more signs of PID
partners have been treated and have no symptoms
What Can Happen if PID Isn't Treated?
If pelvic inflammatory disease isn't treated or went on a long time before being treated, girls can have problems such as:

ongoing pain in the lower belly
trouble getting pregnant (infertility)
pregnancy in the fallopian tube instead of the uterus (an ectopic pregnancy)
an infection in the ovary and fallopian tube (a tubo-ovarian abscess)
Can PID Be Prevented?
The best way to prevent PID and STDs is to not have sex (oral, vaginal, or anal). If you decide to have sex, use a latex condom every time.

If you are sexually active, it's important to get tested for STDs every year, or more often if recommended by your health care provider.

Pubic Lice (Crabs)
en español: Ladillas
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
What Are Pubic Lice (Crabs)?
Pubic lice are tiny insects (about the size of a pinhead). They usually live in hair in the pubic area (the area near the genitals). They also can live in the eyelashes, eyebrows, beard, armpit, and other body hair.

Pubic lice usually spread through sex. Less often, pubic lice is spread by touching infested clothing, towels, and bedding.

Pubic lice are also called "crabs" because of the tiny claws they use to cling to hair.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Pubic Lice?
Pubic lice usually cause itchiness. This can get worse at night when the lice become active.

Sometimes, lice bites can lead to skin redness and irritation. Lice in the eyelashes or eyebrows can cause eye itchiness and redness.

How Do People Get Pubic Lice?
Most people with pubic lice got them through sex or close sexual contact.

Less often, someone can get pubic lice from sharing clothes, sheets, or towels with someone who has pubic lice.

Lice can't jump from person to person. It is very unlikely that someone would get pubic lice from a toilet seat. Lice can't live away from a warm body for long and they do not have feet that could hang on to a toilet seat.

How Are Pubic Lice Diagnosed?
A health care provider usually diagnoses pubic lice by looking at the insect or nits (the small white egg that clings to hair). If needed, the insect can be sent to a lab for identification.

Anyone diagnosed with pubic lice needs to tell:

recent sex partners
people who have shared bed sheets, clothes, or towels
They should check for pubic lice and get treated, if needed.

How Are Pubic Lice Treated?
Pubic lice are treated with medicine to kill the lice. It may be a cream, lotion, or shampoo. Some are available at drugstores without a prescription. Any nits in the pubic hair need to be removed. Some people use their fingers or a comb to remove them, while others shave their pubic hair. Shaving does not get rid of pubic lice, though. The person also needs to use the medicine.

Most treatments for pubic lice need to be used more than once. So it's very important to follow the directions included with the medicine.

All clothes, towels, and sheets used by the person with pubic lice must be:

washed in hot water and dried in a hot drier or dry cleaned
or
put in a sealed plastic bag for 2 weeks
Can Pubic Lice Be Prevented?
Because pubic lice usually spread during sex, not having sex is the best way to avoid them. Condoms do not protect someone from pubic lice because the lice live outside of the area that condoms cover. Shaving pubic hair does not always prevent pubic lice.

Not sharing clothing, bedding, or towels also can help lower the risk of getting pubic lice.

What Else Should I Know?
If you are diagnosed with pubic lice, it is important to go to the doctor and get checked for other STDs (sexually transmitted diseases).

The best way to completely prevent STDs is to not have sex (vaginal, oral, anal). If you do decide to have sex, use a latex condom every time

What Is Syphilis?
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease (STD). Early treatment can cure syphilis (pronounced: SIFF-ill-iss) and prevent long-term problems.

What Are STDs?
STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal). Some STDs can spread through close contact with the genitals or body fluids. (Genitals are the sexual or reproductive organs that are on the outside of the body.)

How Do People Get Syphilis?
Syphilis usually spreads by touching a sore (called a chancre [pronounced: SHANK-er]) or wart-like lesions (called condyloma lata) caused by syphilis. This can happen through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal) or close sexual contact.

The chancre or condyloma lata (pronounced: kon-duh-LOW-muh LAH-tuh) may be hard to see, so someone might not know they have them.

An infected pregnant woman can spread the infection to her unborn baby during pregnancy or delivery.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Syphilis?
Syphilis has different stages. In the order that they happen, they are:

primary syphilis
secondary syphilis
latent syphilis
late syphilis (also called tertiary syphilis)
What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Primary Syphilis?
The main symptom of primary syphilis is a one or more chancres (sores). They develop about 3 weeks after someone is infected. The chancres happens where the sexual contact happened (genitals, mouth, or rectal area). They are usually painless.

The chancre goes away in about 3–6 weeks, even without treatment. But without treatment, syphilis will move on to the next stage, secondary syphilis.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Secondary Syphilis?
A few weeks to months after the chancre appears, these symptoms can begin:

rash, often on the palms of the hands and soles of feet
flu-like symptoms such as fever, headache, tiredness, loss of appetite, muscle aches, joint pain, and sore throat
swollen glands (lymph nodes)
wart-like lesions (condyloma lata) in warm, moist areas, such as the mouth and area around the genitalia and anus
hair loss
Over time, secondary syphilis can liver, kidney, and digestive tract problems.

The symptoms of secondary syphilis will go away. But without treatment, syphilis will move on to the next stage, latent syphilis.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Latent Syphilis?
Someone with latent syphilis is infected but does not have any symptoms ("latent" means it's not obvious or causing symptoms). Syphilis can stay latent for life. Or, it may move to late syphilis.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Late Syphilis?
If latent syphilis progresses to late syphilis (also called tertiary syphilis), it causes serious damage to the heart and blood vessels, brain and nervous system, and other organs.

Late syphilis can develop any time from 1–30 years after someone is infected. Even someone who has not had any symptoms of primary or secondary syphilis can progress to late syphilis.

What Is Neurosyphilis?
Neurosyphilis is syphilis that has spread to the brain and nervous system. It can happen during any of the stages of syphilis. People with neurosyphilis can have:

syphilitic meningitis
seizures
dementia
damage to spinal cord
eye problems that can lead to blindness
What Causes Syphilis?
A type of bacteria called Treponema pallidum causes syphilis.

How Is Syphilis Diagnosed?
To find out if someone has syphilis, health care providers usually do a blood test. Fluid from the chancre also can be tested. Someone who has symptoms of neurosyphilis will get a spinal tap (lumbar puncture). This test collects some fluid from around the brain and spinal cord for testing in a lab.

How Is Syphilis Treated?
Health care providers treat syphilis with antibiotics . These medicines are given as a shot or through an IV (a tiny tube that goes into a vein). How long treatment is needed depends on what stage of syphilis someone is in.

Syphilis can be cured. But the medical problems it can lead to — such as dementia, artery damage, or blindness — usually can't be cured.

After treatment, follow-up testing will make sure that the infection is cured.

All sexual partners should get tested and treated, if necessary:

For primary syphilis: partners from the last 3 months
For secondary syphilis: partners from the last 6 months
For latent syphilis: partners from the last year (because there could have been a chancre or condyloma lata that wasn't noticed)
Can Someone Get Syphilis More Than Once?
Yes, people can get syphilis again if they have sex with someone who is infected.

Can Syphilis Be Prevented?
The only way to prevent syphilis and other STDs is not to have sex (oral, vaginal, or anal). If someone decides to have sex, using a latex condom every time can prevent most STDs.

Anyone who is sexually active should get tested for STDs every year, or more often if recommended by their health care provider

Telling Your Partner You Have an STD
en español: Cómo contarle a tu pareja que tienes una enfermedad de transmisión sexual
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are infections that spread from person to person during vaginal, oral, or anal sex; by using fingers ("fingering"); or by other sexual contact.

If you find out that you have an STD, get treated and tell your partner and any past partners right away.

Why Do I Need to Tell My Partners?
An STD that isn’t treated can spread and cause serious health problems for you and your sex partners.

Here are more reasons to tell a partner:

Letting a past or current partner know gives that person the chance to see a doctor and get treated.
Telling partners you haven’t had sex yet with shows them that you care about them and their health.
Getting treated for an STD when your partner isn’t having treatment could mean that person can pass it back to you.
Not telling a partner about an STD after your doctor has diagnosed you may be illegal in some states.
How Do I Tell a Partner About an STD?
It’s normal to be nervous about having the talk because everyone reacts differently. But it’s best for your partner or any past partners to hear it from you. You wouldn’t someone to learn they have an infection before you say something.

Here’s how to have the talk:

Imagine your roles are reversed. If your partner was the one with an STD, what would you expect that person to do and say? Being willing to have this hard talk shows that you care about your partner and your relationship.

Be direct. If you haven’t had sex yet, you could start by saying, "Before we have sex, I want us to talk about STDs and protection (like condoms) because I have an STD." If you’ve had sex with your partner, that person may have given it to you. Or you may have gotten the STD in a previous relationship.

Say what type of STD you have. You don't have to share every detail of your past relationships. But showing that you're open to talking and answering questions can help your partner feel more comfortable.

Get ready for different reactions. Prepare for your partner to be surprised. People will react differently. They might panic, have lots of questions, or need time to think. Listen rather than doing all the talking.

Don't push your partner to make decisions about sex or your relationship right away. It's normal to want your partner to accept and reassure you after you reveal such personal information. But give the other person some space. Make a suggestion like, "I know you probably want some time to think about this." It shows you're confident and in control.

Encourage your partner to ask questions. As you talk, give your partner the facts about the STD. If you can't answer every question, that's OK. Say you don't know and then search online together, talk with your doctor, or go to a health clinic to learn more.

What Else Should I Know?
If you’ve had sex with your partner, they should be tested, and possibly treated, for the STD. After your partner is treated, don’t have sex for 2 weeks to make sure you don’t give the same infection back to each other. After you're having sex again, get tested for STDs regularly and use a condom the right way every time you have sex.

It may be awkward, but telling partners about STDs is the right thing to do. If you think you have an STD or have questions, talk with a doctor or visit a sexual health clinic (like Planned Parenthood) or student health center.

Telling Your Partner You Have an STD
en español: Cómo contarle a tu pareja que tienes una enfermedad de transmisión sexual
Medically reviewed by: Lonna P. Gordon, MD
Learn About Adolescent Medicine & Pediatric Gynecology at Nemours Children's Health
Listen
Print
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are infections that spread from person to person during vaginal, oral, or anal sex; by using fingers ("fingering"); or by other sexual contact.

If you find out that you have an STD, get treated and tell your partner and any past partners right away.

Why Do I Need to Tell My Partners?
An STD that isn’t treated can spread and cause serious health problems for you and your sex partners.

Here are more reasons to tell a partner:

Letting a past or current partner know gives that person the chance to see a doctor and get treated.
Telling partners you haven’t had sex yet with shows them that you care about them and their health.
Getting treated for an STD when your partner isn’t having treatment could mean that person can pass it back to you.
Not telling a partner about an STD after your doctor has diagnosed you may be illegal in some states.
How Do I Tell a Partner About an STD?
It’s normal to be nervous about having the talk because everyone reacts differently. But it’s best for your partner or any past partners to hear it from you. You wouldn’t someone to learn they have an infection before you say something.

Here’s how to have the talk:

Imagine your roles are reversed. If your partner was the one with an STD, what would you expect that person to do and say? Being willing to have this hard talk shows that you care about your partner and your relationship.

Be direct. If you haven’t had sex yet, you could start by saying, "Before we have sex, I want us to talk about STDs and protection (like condoms) because I have an STD." If you’ve had sex with your partner, that person may have given it to you. Or you may have gotten the STD in a previous relationship.

Say what type of STD you have. You don't have to share every detail of your past relationships. But showing that you're open to talking and answering questions can help your partner feel more comfortable.

Get ready for different reactions. Prepare for your partner to be surprised. People will react differently. They might panic, have lots of questions, or need time to think. Listen rather than doing all the talking.

Don't push your partner to make decisions about sex or your relationship right away. It's normal to want your partner to accept and reassure you after you reveal such personal information. But give the other person some space. Make a suggestion like, "I know you probably want some time to think about this." It shows you're confident and in control.

Encourage your partner to ask questions. As you talk, give your partner the facts about the STD. If you can't answer every question, that's OK. Say you don't know and then search online together, talk with your doctor, or go to a health clinic to learn more.

What Else Should I Know?
If you’ve had sex with your partner, they should be tested, and possibly treated, for the STD. After your partner is treated, don’t have sex for 2 weeks to make sure you don’t give the same infection back to each other. After you're having sex again, get tested for STDs regularly and use a condom the right way every time you have sex.

It may be awkward, but telling partners about STDs is the right thing to do. If you think you have an STD or have questions, talk with a doctor or visit a sexual health clinic (like Planned Parenthood) or student health center.

Trichomoniasis
Medically reviewed by: Amy W. Anzilotti, MD
Listen
Print
What Is Trichomoniasis?
Trichomoniasis (often called "trich") is a sexually transmitted disease (STD).

What Are STDs?
STDs (also called sexually transmitted infections or STIs) are infections that spread through sex (vaginal, oral, or anal). Some STDs can spread through close contact with the genitals or body fluids.

How Do People Get Trichomoniasis?
Trichomoniasis (trik-uh-muh-NEYE-uh-siss) spreads between men and women through vaginal sex. Women can spread trich to other women through sexual contact. Men do not usually get trich from other men.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Trichomoniasis?
Many people with trich have no symptoms. They can spread the infection to others without knowing it.

In females, symptoms can include:

vaginal discharge, which can smell bad
itching, redness, and tenderness in or around the vagina
pain when peeing
pain during sex
bleeding after sex
In males, symptoms can include:

discharge from the penis
pain or burning when peeing
discomfort after ejaculation
What Causes Trichomoniasis?
Trichomoniasis is caused by a parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis.

How Is Trichomoniasis Diagnosed?
To find out if someone has trich, health care providers do tests on:

discharge taken from the vagina or cervix (opening to the womb) in girls
discharge taken from the urethra in guys
pee
How Is Trichomoniasis Treated?
Health care providers treat trichomoniasis with antibiotics . All sexual partners from the past 2 months need treatment too, even if they don't have signs of trichomoniasis.

People can get trichomoniasis again if:
their partners aren't treated
they get treated but then have sex with someone else who has trichomoniasis
What Problems Can Happen?
Females who don't get treatment for trichomoniasis have a greater chance of:

fertility problems (trouble getting pregnant)
developing cervical cancer
getting HIV if they have sex with someone who has HIV
Males who don't get treatment for trichomoniasis have a greater chance of:

swelling and irritation of the tubes at the back of the testicles
swelling and irritation in the prostate
fertility problems (trouble getting a woman pregnant)
developing prostate cancer
Can Trichomoniasis Be Prevented?
The only way to prevent trichomoniasis and other STDs is to not have sex (oral, vaginal, or anal). If you decide to have sex, using a latex condom every time can prevent most STDs.

If you're sexually active, get tested for STDs every year, or more often if recommended by your health care provider.

Urinary Tract Infections
en español: Infecciones del tracto urinario
Medically reviewed by: T. Ernesto Figueroa, MD
Listen
Print
What Is a Urinary Tract Infection?
A bacterial urinary tract infection (UTI) is the most common kind of infection affecting the urinary tract. Urine, or pee, is the fluid that kidneys filter out of the bloodstream. Pee contains salts and waste products, but it doesn't normally contain bacteria. When bacteria get into the bladder or kidney and multiply in the pee, a UTI can happen.

There are three main types of UTI. Bacteria that infect only the urethra (the short tube that delivers pee from the bladder to the outside of the body) cause urethritis (pronounced: yur-ih-THRY-tis). Bacteria can also cause a bladder infection, which is called cystitis (pronounced: sis-TIE-tis). Another, more serious kind of UTI is infection of the kidney itself, known as pyelonephritis (pronounced: pie-low-nih-FRY-tis). With this type of UTI, a person often has back pain, high fever, and vomiting.

The most common type of UTI is cystitis. These mostly just cause discomfort and inconvenience. Bladder infections can be quickly and easily treated. And it's important to get treatment promptly to avoid the more serious infection that reaches the kidneys.

What Causes Urinary Tract Infections?
UTIs usually happen because bacteria enter the urethra, then make their way up into the bladder and cause an infection. Girls get UTIs much more often than guys, most likely due to differences in the shape and length of the urethra. Girls have shorter urethras than guys, and the opening lies closer to the anus (where poop comes out) and the vagina, where bacteria are likely to be.

Bacteria can get into the urethra several ways. During sex, for example, bacteria in the vaginal area may be pushed into the urethra and eventually end up in the bladder, where pee provides a good environment for the bacteria to grow. This is why females who are sexually active often get UTIs. (UTIs are not contagious, so you can't catch a urinary tract infection from someone else.)

Bacteria may also get into a girl's bladder if she wipes from back to front after a bowel movement (BM), which can contaminate the urethral opening. The use of spermicides (including condoms treated with spermicide) and diaphragms as contraceptives also may increase the risk of UTIs.

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) may cause UTI-like symptoms, such as pain with peeing. This is due to the inflammation and irritation of the urethra or vagina that's sometimes associated with chlamydia and other STDs. If untreated, STDs can lead to serious long-term problems, including pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and infertility. Unlike UTIs, STDs are contagious.

Some people seem to get frequent UTIs, but they often have other problems that make them more likely to get an infection, like a problem in the urinary tract structures or function. The most common functional problem of the urinary tract is vesicoureteral reflux (pronounced: veh-zi-coe-you-REE-tur-al), a condition in which some pee flows backward, or refluxes, from the bladder into the ureters and even up to the kidneys.

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of UTIs?
UTIs can cause such signs as:

pain, burning, or a stinging sensation when peeing
an increased urge or more frequent need to pee (though only a very small amount of pee may be passed)
fever
waking up at night a lot to go to the bathroom
belly pain in the area of the bladder (generally below the belly button)
foul-smelling pee that may look cloudy or contain blood
If you have any symptoms of a UTI, you'll need to go to a doctor right away. The sooner you begin treatment, the less uncomfortable you'll be. Call your doctor's office or clinic. If you can't reach your doctor, you can visit an urgent care center or hospital emergency room. The most important thing is to take action as soon as possible.

How Are UTIs Diagnosed?
Only a health care provider can treat urinary tract infections. The first thing a doctor will do is confirm that a person has a UTI by taking a clean-catch urine specimen. At the doctor's office, you'll be asked to clean your genital area with disposable wipes and then pee into a sterile (bacteria-free) cup.

The sample may be used for a urinalysis (a test that microscopically checks the pee for germs or pus) or a urine culture (to grow and identify bacteria in a lab). Knowing what bacteria are causing the infection can help your doctor choose the best treatment.

How Are UTIs Treated?
UTIs are treated with antibiotics. After several days of antibiotics, your doctor may repeat the urine tests to be sure that the infection is gone. It's important to make sure of this because an incompletely treated UTI can come back or spread.

If someone has a lot of pain from a UTI, the doctor may recommend a medicine to help relieve the spasm and pain in the bladder. This will turn pee a bright orange color, but it's harmless and will usually make a person much more comfortable within hours. In the case of a kidney infection, a doctor may prescribe pain medicine.

If you've finished all the medicine or if your symptoms aren't much better after 2 to 3 days of treatment, contact your doctor.
Drink lots of water during and after treatment because each time you pee, the bladder cleanses itself a little bit more. Cranberry juice may also be helpful. Skip drinks that containe caffeine (which can irritate the bladder), such as soda and iced tea.

People who get a doctor's help for a UTI right away should be clear of symptoms within a week. Someone with a more severe infection may need treatment in a hospital so they can get antibiotics by injection or IV (intravenously, given into a vein right into the bloodstream).

A doctor may tell people with UTIs to avoid sex for a week or so, which lets the inflammation clear up completely.

Can UTIs Be Prevented?
A few things can help prevent UTIs. After peeing, girls should wipe from front to back with toilet paper. After BMs, wipe from front to back to avoid spreading bacteria from the rectal area to the urethra.

Also, go to the bathroom when needed and don't hold the pee in. Pee that stays in the bladder gives bacteria a good place to grow.

Keep the genital area clean and dry. Girls should change their tampons and pads regularly during their periods. Bubble baths can irritate the vaginal area, so girls should take showers or plain baths. Avoid long exposure to moisture in the genital area by not wearing nylon underwear or wet swimsuits. Wearing underwear with cotton crotches is also helpful. Skip using feminine hygiene sprays or douches, as these can irritate the urethra.

If you are sexually active, go to the bathroom both before and within 15 minutes after sex. After sex, gently wash the genital area to remove any bacteria. Avoid sexual positions that irritate or hurt the urethra or bladder. Couples who use lubrication during sex should use a water-soluble lubricant such as K-Y Jelly.

Finally, drinking lots of water each day keeps the bladder active and bacteria-free.

UTIs are uncomfortable and often painful, but they're common and easily treated. The sooner you contact your doctor, the sooner you'll be able to get rid of the problem.

Vaginal Yeast Infections
en español: Infecciones vaginales por hongos
Medically reviewed by: Larissa Hirsch, MD
Listen
Print
What Are Vaginal Yeast Infections?
Yeast infections (also known as candidiasis) are common infections caused by Candida albicans yeast, which is a type of fungus. Yeast infections usually happen in warm, moist parts of the body, such as the mouth, and moist areas of skin.

A yeast infection in the vagina is known as vulvovaginal candidiasis (pronounced: can-dih-DYE-uh-sis). Vaginal yeast infections are common in young women, and many will have one at some point. They're not an STD (sexually transmitted disease).

What Are the Signs & Symptoms of Vaginal Yeast Infections?
Vaginal yeast infections can cause:

itching and irritation in the vagina
redness, swelling, or itching of the vulva (the folds of skin outside the vagina)
a thick, white discharge that can look like cottage cheese and is usually odorless, although it might smell like bread or yeast
pain or burning when urinating (peeing) or during sex
If you have any of these symptoms, see your doctor or gynecologist. It's easy to confuse the symptoms of a yeast infection with those of some STDs and other vaginal infections. Your doctor can make sure you are treated for the right type of infection.

If you have a vaginal yeast infection, your doctor can recommend treatment to clear up the symptoms and cure the infection quickly.

What Causes Vaginal Yeast Infections?
Having small amounts of Candida on the skin and inside the mouth, digestive tract, and vagina is normal. A healthy immune system and some "good" bacteria keep the amount in a person's body under control.

But yeast in the vagina can sometimes "overgrow" and lead to symptoms of a yeast infection. Stress, pregnancy, and illnesses that affect the immune system may let yeast multiply. So can some medicines, including some birth control pills and steroids. If you're taking antibiotics, such as for strep throat, the antibiotics can kill the "good" bacteria that normally keep the yeast in check. Yeast also can grow a lot if a girl's blood sugar is high. Girls who have diabetes that isn't controlled are more likely to get yeast infections.

Yeast infections can happen to any girl. Many girls find that they tend to show up right before they get their periods because of the hormonal changes that come with the menstrual cycle. Clothing (especially underwear) that's tight or made of materials like nylon that trap heat and moisture might make yeast infections more likely. Using scented sanitary products and douching can upset the healthy balance of bacteria in the vagina and make yeast infections more likely.

How Are Vaginal Yeast Infections Diagnosed?
Treating a yeast infection is simple, but it's important to visit your doctor for the right diagnosis. Other infections can cause similar symptoms but need different treatments.

At the visit, your doctor might take a urine sample (to rule out a urinary tract infection) and swab some discharge from your vagina to check under a microscope.
How Are Vaginal Yeast Infections Treated?
If you do have a yeast infection, your health care provider probably will prescribe a pill to swallow or a cream, tablet, or suppository to put in the vagina. When you get home, follow all the directions on the package carefully. Creams, tablets, and suppositories often come with an applicator to help you place the medicine inside your vagina, where it can begin to work.

If you're using a vaginal treatment and are sexually active, you should not have sex until the infection has been completely treated because these medicines can weaken condoms and diaphragms.

All these types of medicine can clear up your symptoms in a couple of days and cure the infection within a week. It's important to take the medicine for the whole time it’s prescribed. If you stop taking it too soon, the infection could come back. If you're not feeling better within a few days of finishing treatment, call your doctor.

Some medicines used to treat yeast infections are available without a prescription, but you see a doctor for your diagnosis before buying one. You could have another type of infection that might get worse if not properly treated. Also, over-the-counter medicine should not be used by anyone younger than 12 or girls who might be pregnant without talking to a doctor first.

Do Guys Get Yeast Infections?
Guys can get an infection of the head of the penis from the same yeast that causes vaginal infections. Guys who have diabetes or are on antibiotics for a long time are more likely to get this infection. A guy with a yeast infection may not have any symptoms or the tip of the penis may get red and sore or itchy. Some guys might have a slight discharge or pain when peeing.

Guys who are not circumcised need to take extra care to clean properly beneath their foreskins. The warm, moist folds of the foreskin are the perfect environment for yeast to thrive. Keeping the area clean and dry may help prevent an infection. If symptoms do show up, a doctor can treat the infection.

Can Vaginal Yeast Infections Be Prevented?
For most girls, there's no way to prevent yeast infections. You may feel more comfortable and have less irritation if you wear breathable cotton underwear and clothes and avoid vaginal sprays and douches. Wearing cotton underwear may also help prevent yeast infections.

If you have diabetes, keeping blood sugar levels stable also can help you avoid yeast infections.

If you think you have an infection, call your doctor for advice. Don't take leftover antibiotics or someone else's antibiotics or medicine. They might be the wrong choice for your condition, and taking antibiotics when they're not needed can make yeast infections more likely.

Yeast infections can be annoying, especially if they happen often. To help avoid them, follow your doctor's advice, wear cotton underwear, and try to wear loose-fitting clothes. Your body will thank you.

A finger condom (also called a finger cot) is a thin pouch made of a stretchy material like latex. It’s placed over a finger and is often used to help prevent infection.

Why Are Finger Condoms Used?
People may use disposable finger condoms (ones that you use once then throw away) to:

avoid the spread of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) during sex using fingers (“fingering”)
keep germs from getting into cuts on fingers instead of using a bandage
Reusable finger condoms, often made of silicone or rubber, are sometimes used to help do things like turn pages. This type should not be used for cuts or sexual activity.

How Does a Finger Condom Work?
A finger condom comes rolled up like a male condom. It’s placed on the tip of the finger, then rolled down to the base.

Before using a finger condom, wash your hands. After using it, throw it out and clean your hands again. Germs may still be on or in the finger condom, so don’t try to wash and reuse it.

When using finger condoms for sex, be sure to use a new one for different parts of the body, like the vagina and anus. This helps prevent germs from spreading and causing things like urinary tract infections (UTIs).

What Problems Can Happen?
There can be problems with finger condoms, such as:

Finger condoms could fall off during use. If one stays in the body during sex and you can’t get it out with a clean finger, go to your doctor or a health clinic right away. 
Fingernails or rings can make a hole in a finger condom. If this happens, throw it away, wash your hands, and use a new one. If the finger condom broke during sex, both you and your partner should get tested for STDs. 
STDs can be on areas of skin that a finger condom doesn’t cover. So it’s possible to get an STD even if you use this type of protection. The only method that always prevents STDs (and accidental pregnancy) is abstinence (not having sex).
Where Are Finger Condoms Available?
You can buy finger condoms in drugstores and online. Your doctor’s office and health clinics like Planned Parenthood also might have them. 

What Else Should I Know?
Before using a finger condom, make sure that you and your partner aren’t allergic to the material. Some are made of latex, so if either of you has a latex allergy, choose finger condoms made of a different material. As with other types of condoms, don't use oil-based lubricants (such as mineral oil, petroleum jelly, or baby oil) because they can break down the material.

Because finger condoms could slip off, it might be safer to use disposable gloves made of latex or nitrile.

You might have questions about sex, finger condoms, or other ways to help prevent STDs and pregnancy. Talk with a parent or other trusted adult, or your doctor. You can also reach out to a health clinic.





